Botanical Name: Ganoderma lucidumCommon Names: Basidiomycetes Mushroom, Champignon Reishi, Ganoderma lucidum, Ling Chih, Ling Zhi, Mushroom of Immortality, Rei-ShiReishi mushroom, also known as lingzhi, is a fungus, which belongs to the Ganodermataceae family. It’s a fan-shaped mushroom and orange to reddish brown in color. Since they are rare to find, it’s commercially grown and sold in the form of tea, capsules, and beauty products. Indeed, reishi mushrooms possess numerous health benefits, which makes it a great staple of eastern medicine. Some of the benefits that reishi exhibits are:They are generally safe to use, yet it can lead to digestive disorders in some people. You must consult a doctor before taking them, especially if you’re pregnant, breastfeeding, have blood disorders or is about to have surgery.Botanical Name: Gynostemma pentaphyllumCommon Names: Five Leaf Ginseng, Poor Man’s Ginseng, Southern Ginseng, Miracle Grass, Fairy Herb, Sweet Tea Vine, Gospel Herb, Immortality Herb, Immortality TeaGynostemma, also known to be “the herb of immortality” because it could make you feel like an immortal by boosting your immunity. It produces a beneficial compound- ginsenosides, which is rare in any other plant. This compound promotes high energy levels and reduces stress, making your life healthier than ever. The herb is available in the natural form as well as commercial tea and powder. Following are some of the benefits that this fairy herb holds:While it’s possibly safe, some people can suffer from severe nausea and an increase in bowel movements. It may reduce the blood clotting process and might adversely affect the blood sugar levels of diabetic people. Avoid intaking the herb if you’re pregnant, breastfeeding or healing a recent surgery. Consult your doctor whenever required.Botanical Name: Matricaria recutitaCommon Names: German chamomile, Roman chamomile, English chamomile,
Camomilla, and Flos ChamomileChamomile is a European plant of the daisy family with white and yellow flowers and a fresh aroma. People use it in manufacturing almost everything, from cosmetics to beverages for years. Here are some of its health benefits:If you notice any skin allergy, eye irritation, or other hypersensitivity reactions, contact your doctor immediately. Avoid applying chamomile around your eyes and before applying it on your skin, do a patch test first. Botanical Name: Taraxacum Common Names: Bitterwort, blow-ball, cankerwort, clockflower, Irish daisy, lion’s tooth, piss-in-bed, pissinlit, priest’s crown, puffball, swine’s snout, telltime, yellow gowanDandelion is a weed belonging to the daisy family and is easily available in most parts of the world. Contrary to being merely just a weed, it has a wide array of health benefits. They contain high levels of protein and a variety of vitamin and minerals, which makes them perfect survival food. Below are the potential health benefits of dandelion:If you take dandelion by the mouth and apply it to sensitive skin, it may lead to allergic reactions. If by any chance you seem to have an allergy, consult your doctor before taking this plant. Pregnant and breastfeeding women should avoid intake.Botanical Name: Athyrium filis-feminaCommon Names: Lady Fern, Common ladyfern, Subarctic ladyfern, Asplenium ladyfern, Southern Lady Fern, Tatting FernLady fern, also known as shuttlecock fern or eagle fern. It commonly grows across the US, and in some parts of Europe, Canada, and Australia. Like many ferns, it reproduces from its spores. Its leaves contain a high amount of protein, zinc, calcium, potassium, vitamin A, vitamin B and B complex. The fern is regarded to be a plant with home remedy qualities and is famous as an edible vegetable in many areas. The list below contains some health benefits of lady fern:Not enough information is available to question about the safety of this plant yet avoid it if you’re pregnant.Botanical Name: Zingiber officinaleCommon Names: Jiang, gingembre, ingwer, adrak, kon-gang, adiGinger is one of the most delicious and healthiest spices available on Earth. Not only it adds a tasty flavor to the food, it’s full of nutrients and bioactive compounds that are beneficial for your brain and body. Ginger mostly grows in warmer areas of Asia and is popular to cure an upset stomach. Some other benefits include:Excessive intake of ginger might increase bleeding tendency and promote diarrhea. Throat irritation, abdominal discomfort, central nervous system depression are some other downfalls of ginger. However, you must not worry about these side effects if you’re intaking it in the prescribed dose.Botanical Name: Schisandra chinensisCommon Names: Beiwuweizi, Chinese Mongolavine, Chinese Schizandra, Chosen-Gomischi, Five-Flavor-Fruit, Fructus Schisandrae, Gomishi, Magnolia Vine, Northern Schisandra, Wuhzi, WuweiziA fruit-bearing vine, these berries are purple-red in color and have four tastes- sweet, salty, bitter and sour. It’s a popular adaptogen to increase resistance power to fight stress and diseases. You can take Schisandra berries as whole or in the powdered form available in stores. It has a variety of health benefits, which you can read below:Schisandra can stimulate the central nervous system, which in turn can adversely affect people with epilepsy. These berries can worsen peptic ulcers and high brain pressure.Botanical Name: Rhodiola roseaCommon Names: Rose root, roseroot, Aaron’s rod, Arctic root, king’s crown, lignum rhodium, orpin roseAlso known as “golden root,” this fragrant root of a herb has adaptogenic qualities to eliminate stressors. The extract grows in northern climates in places like Asia, Russia, Europe, and Greece. This herb is significantly used as a natural remedy since ages to treat multiple illnesses:For now, there are no scientifically proven downfalls of using this herb. However, to be on the safe side, avoid it if you have some allergy.Botanical Name: Salvia officinalisCommon Names: Garden sage, true sage, salvia real, echter salbeiSage is a woody herb and belongs to the mint family. It’s a staple ingredient in many cuisines around the world and is proven to be one among the healthiest food. Sage contains a variety of volatile oils, flavonoids, phenolic acids. It has a soft and sweet-savory flavor and wonderful health-promoting properties:Sage is a safe herb with no side effects. To be on safe side, never consume sage excessively especially in the tea and essential oil form.Botanical Name: TagetesCommon Names: Caltha, Ganda, Gols bloom, Garden Marigold, Gold bloom, Holligold, Marybud, Pot MarigoldMarigold is a subdivision of perennial plant in the sunflower family. It’s usually yellow, orange, red, and maroon in appearance and belongs to the kingdom- Plantae. There are many more benefits of marigold except its bright beauty:Marigold can sometimes result in an allergic reaction in forms of rash, itchiness, trouble breathing, and dizziness. Seek medical attention if you notice any of the above or other effects.Botanical Name: Capsicum annuum ‘acuminatum’Common Names: Capsicum frutescens, guinea pepper, african bird pepper,Cayenne pepper is a type of capsicum annum and is usually used to add a chilly flavor to dishes. This pepper has been a part of Native American dishes and medicine since year unknown. The ingredient capsaicin is held responsible for the various health benefits of this hot chili. Here are several benefits of cayenne pepper:Cayenne peppers are safe to eat when in a limit, excessive intake can upset your stomach.Botanical Name: EchinaceaCommon Names: American Cone Flower, Black Sampson, Black Susans, Brauneria Angustifolia, Comb Flower, Hedgehog, Helichroa Purpurea, Indian Head, Kansas Snakeroot, Red Sunflower, Rock-Up-Hat, Rudbeckie Pourpre, Scurvy Root, SnakerootThis herb is native to the eastern areas of the rocky mountains of the United States. The herb is long used as a herbal remedy by the Indian tribes. There are many commercial echinacea products available in the market in forms of tablets, juice, and tea. Listed are some of the benefits of this herb:Most common side effects of echinacea include nausea and stomach pain. If you suffer from an autoimmune disease, you must refrain from using this herb.Botanical Name: Eschscholzia californicaCommon Names: Golden poppy, California sunlight, cup of gold, yellow poppyCalifornia poppy is a medicinal flowering herb, which contains soothing properties. Also, the herb consists of Vitamin A, C, E, calcium, and magnesium. The general taste is bitter and is native to Western North America. In appearance, it’s red, orange, and yellow with cup-shaped petals. The plant is such great a herb that April 6 is officially named “California Poppy Day.”It can slow down the central nervous system, which can cause sleepiness and other lethargic effects.Botanical Name: Asclepias curassavicaCommon Names: Tropical milkweed, cotton bush, hierba de la cucaracha, Mexican butterfly weed, redhead, scarlet milkweed, wild ipecacuanhaBloodflower is a garden plant that is a source of food for the butterflies. It flowers nearly year-around with vivid red blooms. Though it has plenty of health benefits, you should be cautious when using this plant because its stems and leaves release a poisonous milky sap, which can potentially damage your eyes.It’s advisory to consult your doctor before consuming the blood flower.Also Read: How To Grow Licorice (Mulethi)Botanical Name: Thymus vulgarisCommon Names: Common thyme, English thyme, garden thymeThyme is among the most popular herbs from the mint family. It has been used to treat a range of symptoms along with multiple dietary uses. Also, this ornamental herb has antibacterial and insecticidal properties. Commercially, the herb is available in the forms of essential oils and tea.Thyme is safe to use by adults as well as children if taken in normal food amounts.Botanical Name: Agastache RugosaCommon Names: Blue licorice, purple giant hyssop, indian mint, wrinkled giant hyssop, huo xiang, chinese patchouliAs the name suggests, Korean mint is a short-lived herb belonging to the mint family. It’s purple flower spikes are usually two to four inches tall. The minty herb is a drought tolerant plant when it gets set correctly in the ground. In addition to health benefits, it can attract birds and butterflies to your yard. The leaves of this medicinal plant contribute to an uplifting tea and can provide a unique seasoning to your food.The plant is advisable to consume in a recommended dosage.Botanical Name: Medicago SativaCommon Names: Burgundy clover, purple medick, lucerne, holy hayA perennial flowering plant in the family Fabaceae, mostly used for grazing as well as green manure in the farming land. It has a superior content of vitamins, minerals, and protein, which are helpful in cleansing your blood. Several health tonics, tea, supplements, and hair growth tonics are available in the market as a substitute for naturally growing alfalfa in your yard.Alfalfa seeds might prove them unsafe if taken for long-term. It might as well result in an allergy similar to lupus erythematosus.Botanical Name: Rubus fruticosus L. agg.Common Names: Bramble, european blackberry, scaldhead, zarzamora, murier, amora silvestreBlackberry is an edible fruit that belongs to the Rosaceae family. The dark color of the berries indicates a high concentration of antioxidants. The fruit is low in calories and rich in fiber and nutrients and has antiviral and antibacterial properties.People with a sensitive stomach can feel the urge to vomit right after eating the berries.Botanical Name: ThelespermaCommon Names: Hopi tea greenthread, navajo tea, hopi teaPopularly known as the Indian tea, this herbal tea is an extract from a single plant, indigenous to regions of the southwest. The tea is typically prepared by boiling a bundle of it in about 6 cups of water for 5-6 minutes. The tea has an aromatic taste and is enjoyable even without any sweetener.Botanical Name: Tanacetum PartheniumCommon Names: Altamisa, Bachelor’s Buttons, Chrysanthème Matricaire, Chrysanthemum parthenium, Chrysanthemum praealtum, Featherfew, Featherfoil, Flirtwort Midsummer Daisy, Grande Camomille, Partenelle, Santa MariaThis flowering plant of the daisy family is also called bachelor’s button and is a preventative against a migraine. You can either grow your feverfew or buy dried capsules, tablets, or tinctures from a store. You can even dry the leaves at home; the result remains as potent as fresh leaves.When taken during pregnancy, it can cause UTERINE contraction. Similarly, you should not use feverfew if you are breastfeeding or have taken aspirin or other NSAIDs recently.Botanical Name: Satureja MontanaCommon Names: Ajedrea, Calamintha montana, Herbe de Saint Julien, Mountain Savory Oil, Poivre d’Âne, Sadrée, Sarriette des Montagnes, Satureja montana, Satureja obovata, SavoryWinter Savory can grow up to one foot, its deep green herbaceous perennial plant, native to warm regions of southern regions of Europe. It is a semi-evergreen herb and belongs to the family Lamiaceae.Special precaution must be taken by pregnant and breastfeeding women. Winter savory is likely safe to use when in a lower amount.Botanical Name: Nepeta catariaCommon Names: Catnip, Catswort, Catnep, Catrup, Catmint, Catswort, Field Balm, Nep, Herb CattaCatnip is a perennial herb member of the mint family and can grow up to three feet high. Manufactures of medicine repeatedly use the flowering tops of the plant to help people with:Catnip can cause drowsiness, which can reduce your productivity and can lead to vomiting as well. It’ll be better to take it in the night to learn how it works for you. Moreover, children and pregnant women must restrain from taking the herb.Botanical Name: Spinacia oleraceaCommon Names: palak, épinard , spinat , spinace , espinaca , and hispaneSpinach is one among the most favored edible flowering plant, native to central and western Asia. The leaves of the plant are worldwide famous as a vegetable. The leaves are an excellent source of Vitamin K, A, and C. When you cook and eat spinach, your body absorbs a higher content of protein, fiber, thiamin, and zinc.In the worst case of spinach complication, a person may experience mild diarrhea, allergic reactions, or even kidney stones if taken regularly in big quantities.Botanical Name: Allium SativumCommon Names: Ajo, Alho, Allii Sativi Bulbus, Allium, Allium sativum, Da Suan, Echte Rokkenbolle, Echter Knoblauch, Lasun, Maneul, Ninniku, Rason, Rocambole, Rockenbolle, Rust Treacle, Schlangenknoblauch, Stinking Rose, Suan, Thoum, VitlokAllium sativum, commonly called garlic is a species of the Allium family and is a common food ingredient all around the world. It has a unique flavor, which makes it an indispensable element in many dishes. Ancient Greek physicians have referred it to be the father of western medicines. Not just it eases people with heart and blood issues, it has several other health benefits too.Before taking garlic, do enough research on the web for its interactions with various drugs present in popular medicines.Botanical Name: Mentha × piperitaCommon Names:  Black Peppermint, Brandy Mint, Field Mint, Herba Menthae, Lamb Mint, Mint Balm, Paparaminta, Western PeppermintCrossing watermint with spearmint produces the famous plant from the mint family- Peppermint. In the modern era, peppermint is favorite to flavor soft drinks, ice creams, toothpaste, and many other products. Here are some medicinal properties that it holds:Using peppermint in normal food amounts is possibly safe. Avoid using commercial peppermint products that are coated with enteric to prevent anal burns.Botanical Name: Cynara scolymusCommon Names: Cynara, French artichoke, and green artichokeGlobe Artichoke is a perennial medicinal plant that is primarily grown for its edible and nutritious flower buds. The plant is native to the Mediterranean region. However, it’s frequently used in preparing food items in Italy, Spain, and other areas of the world. Not just in food, it’s an ingredient of much herbal tea and liqueur.It might increase bile flow and therefore worsen bile duct obstruction.Botanical Name: Tanacetum vulgareCommon Names: Wurmkraut, tanaceto, boerenwormkruid, renfana, bitter buttons common tansy, English fern, golden buttons, hindheal, parsley fern, scented fern, tanaceto, tanarida, tanacée, Rainfarn, tanaisie, tanaisie commune and erva-de-San-MarcosBelonging to the aster family, Tansy is native to temperate Europe and Asia. Many manufacturing companies use tansy extracts to process perfumes and green dye. Tansy increases the saliva and blood flow to the tissues, curing many ailments of mouth, stomach, pelvic area, and intestines.Tansy is poisonous when taken by mouth and can be allergic to the skin.Also Read: Best Chocolate Scented FlowersBotanical Name: Uncaria tomentosaCommon Names: uña de gato, Uncaria guianensis, Hawk’s claw, and GarabatoThe claw-shaped thorns are from where the woody vine gains its unique name. The pharmaceutical industries often use the root and bark of the cat’s claw to manufacture medicines for:Cat’s claw is particularly safe to use by most people, but some people may react to it with a headache, nausea, and vomiting.Botanical Name: Ocimum basilicumCommon Names: Albahaca, Basilic, Basilic Commun, Basilic Grand, Basilic Grand Vert, Basilic Romain, Basilic aux Sauces, Basilici Herba, Basilici Herba, Common Basil, Garden Basil, Krishna Tulsi, Munjariki, Ocimum basilicum, St. Josephwort, Surasa, Sweet Basil, Vanatulasi, Varvara, Visva TulsiBasil is a herb popular as a food seasoning to promote health benefits. It’s an adaptogen herb with anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties. From slowing the aging process to building a stronger immunity, health benefits of basil are quite a lot:The medicinal plant is safe to use by most people. However, you should only take the leaves for a short term.Botanical Name: Curcuma longaCommon Names: Haldi, Halodhi, Arishina, Halud, Haridra, Yaingang, Indian saffron, ukon, nghe, wong-keongTurmeric is a spice that belongs to the ginger family and has bioactive compounds. Due to these compounds, the herb is an antiseptic with numerous other health benefits. It has a unique earthy taste with a heady aroma and is usually bright orange.Turmeric is potentially safe to use by anyone. Research more about the spice if you have any doubts about its safety.Botanical Name: Drumstick TreeCommon Names: Windibundu, Kpashima, Kotba, Zingeridende, Nasadua, Gawara, Sejana Sanjina, Soanjana, Lal Sahinjano, Sigru Shobhanjan, Sobhan jana, Shobanjana, Danshamula, Swanjera, Murungai, Murunkak-kai, Morunga, Maranga calalu, Mulaga, Sajana, Morunga, Morungai, SundanMoringa is a drought tolerant plant, which is widely cultivated for its medicinal leaves, flower, pods, and stems. It’s grown in the tropical parts of the world, especially Himalayan regions of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Afghanistan. While all the parts of the plant are healthy, the leaves are the most nutritional part. Moringa is a nutritious vegetable, which can solve problems like:It’s not safe to use the roots and barks of the tree, especially if you’re pregnant or breastfeeding.Botanical Name: Annona muricataCommon Names: Custard apple, cherimoya, guanabana, soursop, and brazilian paw pawA small evergreen tree, parts of which are used in the pharmaceutical industries to manufacture medicines. Recently it has received ample attention as an anti-cancer food. Although these declarations are a result of test tube studies, scientists are yet to confirm it’s effectiveness on humans. It’s highly rich in antioxidant properties, which makes it favorable by a mass of people.Graviola can cause nerve damage and movement problems with long-term use. Consult your doctor before use if you have high blood pressure, diabetes, or if you’re pregnant.Botanical Name: Azadirachta indicaCommon Names: Neem, Margosa, Nim, Nimba, Persian Lilac, Pride of China and Indian LilacNeem or Indian lilac is a tall evergreen plant cultivated for its timber, resin, and aromatic seed oil. Though it’s an evergreen plant, it may shed all its leaf in extreme drought conditions. Apart from using it for medicinal purposes, it can also serve as an insecticide to eliminate insects from your indoors. It’s most famous in the Indian subcontinent for its beneficial traits in healing:Neem consumption is not for infants and those with existing kidney or liver issues.Botanical Name: Aloe barbadensisCommon Names: Cape aloe, Aloe curacao, Barbadoes aloe, Venezuela aloe, Indian alces, Ghirita, Lu hui, Star CactusAloe vera is an evergreen succulent with almost no to a little stem. Originated from the Arabian Peninsula, this plant grows worldwide in the tropical climates. The plant is famous among modern gardeners as it can grow indoors as well as outdoors, successfully. Many industries have been using the plant in their products such as beverages, lotions, ointments, to name a few.Aloe latex can lead to can lead to cramps, diarrhea, and other serious problems.shutterstock/Wut_MoppieBotanical Name: Calendula officinalisCommon Names: Caltha, Ganda, Gols bloom, Garden Marigold, Gold bloom, Holligold, MarybudCalendula is an ornamental flowering plant that grows worldwide but is native to the Mediterranean region. Not just they add an attractive and lively decoration to your garden, it also poses multiple health benefits on usage by humans. The chemicals present in calendula can help new tissues to grow more quickly over deep cuts and other wounds.To be safe, avoid the herb if you’re allergic to marigold, pregnant or lactating.Botanical Name: Rosmarinus officinalisCommon Names: Rusmari, Rosmarin, Rosmariini, Ramerino, Romero, Erromero, Rozmarinë,  Ružmarin and DendrolivanoRosemary is a woody and fragrant evergreen herb with fine needle-like leaves and warm-bitter taste. It’s a member of the mint family, which is used mostly for seasoning in Italian dishes. Rosemary is rich in iron and calcium, and its aroma can benefit people with memory issues. The extracts of its leaves and twigs have many medicinal and culinary uses.Side effects include vomiting, coma, and pulmonary edema.Botanical Name: Lavandula angustifoliaCommon Names: Lavanda, levănțică, Lavandīna, Lavendin, Levanduľa, Laventeli, Lavan­dula , Le­vanta , Lavânta çiçeği, and LavendelLavender belongs to the mint family with many culinary uses and also makes a great landscape decoration for your yard. The plant is unusual in appearance with finely-toothed leaves and small flowers with purple bracts. Contrary to this fact, not all lavenders look purple. Some hybrid species have other attractive pastel hues like pale pink, white, yellow, violet blue, and rose. It can last for several years if given the right attention.Lavender, sometimes can cause constipation, headache, and irritation.Botanical Name: Greek HayCommon Names: Alholva, Bockshornklee, Bockshornsame, Chandrika, Fenogreco, Foenugraeci Semen, Greek Clover, Greek Hay, Hu Lu Ba, Medhika, Methi, Methika, Sénégrain, Sénégré, Trigonella Foenum, Trigonella foenum-graecum, and Trigonella foenugraecumFenugreek is an annual plant with light green leaves and small white flowers. It is long used as a herb, spice, and vegetable as well. The seeds of the plant are cuboid in shape with a yellow color and somewhat bitter taste. It is commonly used in India in many dishes since ages for its richness in protein, fats, vitamins, zinc, and other minerals.Fenugreek may cause stomach irritation, allergic reactions, hypoglycemia. Pregnant women and children must avoid the intake of fenugreek.Botanical Name: Withania SomniferaCommon Names: Ajagandha, Asana, Asgandha, Ashagandha, Asoda, Asundha, Avarada, Ayurvedic Ginseng, Ginseng Indien, Hayahvaya, Indian Ginseng, Kanaje Hindi, Kuthmithi, Peyette, Physalis somnifera, Turangi-Ghanda, Vajigandha, Winter Cherry and Withania somniferaWithania Somifera is a plant in the nightshade family with flowers in a bell shape and dull green leaves. U.S markets sell Ashwagandha as dietary supplements, and it’s commonly used in Ayurveda for its medicinal benefits. However, there is no specific evidence which can prove any of the benefits.Large doses can cause abdominal discomfort, diarrhea and even miscarriage in pregnant women.Botanical Name: CymbopogonCommon Names: Andropogon citratus, Andropogon flexuosus, Ceylon Citronella Grass, Citronnelle de Ceylan, Citronnelle de Java, Citronnelle de Madagascar, Cymbopogon nardis, Fever Grass, Herbe Citron, Hierba de Limón, Jonc Odorant, Verveine IndienneLemongrass is a perennial grass of the grass family, a culinary herb in Asian cuisines and medicinal herb in India. People cultivate the herb because of its lemon-like aroma and therapeutic properties. It grows well in the summer season with a red base stem and a height of up to ten feet. The grass genus is a common ingredient in many deodorants, soaps, tea, and cosmetics.It’s unsafe to take lemongrass by mouth when you’re breastfeeding or pregnant.Botanical Name: Calotropis proceraCommon Names: Giant Milkweed, Crown Flower, Giant Calotrope, Swallow-wortCrown flower has a bunch of waxy white or lavender flowers, which makes them an excellent choice for floral arrangements. Growing crown flower in your yard isn’t difficult as long as you put them near an area with full sun. It holds a strong position when it comes to Ayurvedic treatments for various ailments:Calotropis in unsafe to use especially in high doses, it can lead to heart problems.Botanical Name: Saussurea costusCommon Names: Betalauri, wild ginger, lakhut, and keukandCostus is a medicinal herb of Costaceae family with an approximate height of 30-40 cm. The oil extracts of the root and the root itself is used for treating many medical ailments. It’s a significant component in cosmetics, fixatives, and food flavoring products.Not enough information is available on the effects of costus on pregnant or breastfeeding women. Avoid it to stay on the safe side.Botanical Name: Stevia rebaudianaCommon Names: Sweetleaf, Sugarleaf, and ChrysanthemumCandy leaf is a plant species of the sunflower family and native to Brazil and Paraguay. As the name tells, it’s taste is as sweet as candy. Cultivators widely prefer to grow it for its sweet leaves which act as a source for many sweetener products. It has gained attention from fitness lover all over the world since it’s a natural alternative to processed sugar.Although food administrations declare stevia to be safe, raw stevia herb may harm your kidneys.Botanical Name: Althaea OfficinalisCommon Names: Marsh Mallow, Malvaceae, Hollycock, Genus Althaea, White Mallow, Mallards, Mauls, Schloss Teai, Cheeses, Mortification Koot, Mortification root, Sweet weed, and WymoteNative to Europe, Western Asia, and North Africa, marshmallow is an ornamental plant. The leaves, flowers, and roots of the plant are long used for herbal medicines. Other than herbal uses, they have several culinary uses as well.The plant is safe to use, but it may interact with any other drug/medicine. So, it’s better to consult a doctor before using it.Botanical Name: Arctium lappaCommon Names:  Arctium, Arctium tomentosum, Bardana, Bardana-minor, Bardanae Radix, Bardane, Burdock Root Extract, Burr Seed, Clotbur, Cocklebur, Cockle Buttons, Edible Burdock, Fox’s Clote, Gobo, Glouteron, Grande Bardane, Great BurCultivated in gardens for its roots, it’s a plant from sunflower family. This biennial plant can reach the height of 3-9 feet with thistle-like purple flowers. Every part of the plant – leaves, roots, flowers, and seeds are used to treat a sore throat, insect bites, flu, constipation, diabetes, eczema, and many more diseases.Great burdock might slow the blood clotting process; people with injury must restrain from taking it. Moreover, it must not be consumed during pregnancy.Botanical Name: Dioscorea PolystachyaCommon Names: Igname,  Nagaimo, Pochrzyn chinski, Iams kitaiskii, Huai sua, Name de China, Igname de Chine, Chinese potato, Wild yam, Verrilaivalli, and MalayChinese yam is an invasive plant from the yam family. This twining vine usually grows to a height of 3-5 meters and twines in a clockwise motion. The flowers of the plant smell like cinnamon, and that’s why it’s also referred to as cinnamon-vine.Large amounts of Chinese yam can cause vomiting and nausea.Botanical Name: Gentiana luteaCommon Names: Gentian, Bitter Root, Bitterwort, Gall Weed, Geneciana, Gentiana acaulis, Gentiana kochiana, Gentiana lutea, Gentianae Radix, Gentiane, Gentiane Acaule, Pale Gentian, Racine Amère, Stemless Gentian, Yellow Centiyane, and Wild GentiaThe great yellow gentian is a herbaceous plant of the gentian family and originates from central and southern Europe. One of its common names is “Bitterwort” because of its extremely bitter taste. Many herbal bitters and soft drinks use the roots of the great yellow gentian as a critical ingredient.People with low blood pressure should refrain from using it. Stop using gentian at least a week before or after surgery.Botanical Name: Chrysopogon zizanioidesCommon Names: Cuscus grass, Khas-khas, Khus-khus, Ramacham, and VettiverIt’s a bunchgrass, which is most common in India, especially in the western and northern parts of the country. The roots of the grass are used to extract oil for the manufacture of many cosmetics and in aromatherapy.Taking vetiver during pregnancy might result in a miscarriage. Likewise, maintain distance from it if you’re lactating.This article on best medicinal plants is created for informational purposes only. Always consult your physician before taking anything. This general information is not intended to diagnose any medical condition or to replace your healthcare professional.Very educational. Loved it!Thank you for sharing this article about the best medicinal plants. These can be especially helpful for those who don’t like taking medicines as well as to those who live in the provinces and have no access to hospitals or clinics.Thank you for more usefull information about the medicinal plants.Can you recommend a book I could buy for reference?I would like to buy for reading the book which include the information of usages and plantation system of all these.
Example: how can i store up all these for future medication?
and how can i get help myself for planting all these flowers?
I would be really grateful if you can kindly reply me and help me regarding my question.Thank you and best regards,
MangExactly I need all these plants to plant, to have my own business in my area in South AfricaI have liked the plants and there useful and how it works thanksKnow the preparation of the medicine how do we prepare themSave my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.Δ<h2><h2>Balcony Garden Web is all about gardening. Here we serve you the best and informative gardening ideas, creative DIY's and limited space gardening tips and tricks.Balcony Garden Web is all about gardening. Here we serve you the best and informative gardening ideas, creative DIY's and limited space gardening tips and tricks.© 2021 Balcony Garden Web | All rights reserved