Da-Cheng Hao, in Ranunculales Medicinal Plants, 2019Medicinal plants have long been utilized in traditional medicine and worldwide ethnomedicine. This chapter presents a glimpse of the current status of and future trends in medicinal plant genomics, evolution, and phylogeny. These dynamic fields are at the intersection of phytochemistry and plant biology and are concerned with evolution mechanisms and systematics of medicinal plant genomes, origin and evolution of plant genotype and metabolic phenotype, interaction between medicinal plant genomes and environment, and correlation between genomic diversity and metabolite diversity, etc. The uses of the emerging high-end genomic technologies can be expanded from crop plants to traditional medicinal plants to expedite the medicinal plant breeding and transform them to the living factory of medicinal compounds. The utility of molecular phylogeny and phylogenomics in predicting chemodiversity and bioprospecting is also highlighted within the context of natural product-based drug discovery and development. The representative case studies of medicinal plant genome, phylogeny, and evolution are summarized to exemplify the expansion of knowledge pedigree and the paradigm shift to the omics-based approaches, which update our awareness about plant genome evolution and enable the molecular breeding of medicinal plants and the sustainable utilization of plant pharmaceutical resources.Ram Singh, Geetanjali, in Natural Products and Drug Discovery, 2018 Medicinal plants have always played a pivotal role as sources for drug lead compounds. Early humans, driven by their instinct, taste, and experience, treated their illnesses by using plants; hence, the history of medicinal plants is as long as the history of humans. One challenge that the evolution of medicinal plants faces is their classification. Over the years, taxonomists came with many different approaches for plant classifications such as morphologic classification, anatomic classification, and chemotaxonomic classification. The first two methods are grouped under traditional classifications, whereas the third method is a modern approach to classifying the plants. The concept of classification of medicinal plants based on chemical character is not new, but over time, it has experienced more limitations than possibilities. The present chapter discusses how the taxonomy of medicinal plants and how information on their phytochemicals can be used for their classification, problems associated with classification, and useful applications.In Underexplored Medicinal Plants from Sub-Saharan Africa, 2020Medicinal plants from Africa boast a wide variety of biological properties, which need to be discovered, documented, and explored. While other countries have extensive pharmacopoeias to use as a guideline when it comes to medicinal plants, Africa has only but a number of books which contain basic information. There have been some strides recently with the publishing of the African Herbal Pharmacopoeia, a truly valuable resource. While a second edition is in the pipeline, it focusses on the most prominent and well known and well-used medicinal plants from different countries in Africa.Theophine Chinwuba Okoye, ... Emeka K. Okereke, in Toxicological Survey of African Medicinal Plants, 2014Medicinal plants have been the basis of treatment of various diseases in African traditional medicine as well as other forms of treatment from diverse cultures of the world. About 80% of the world’s population still depends solely on traditional or herbal medicine for treatment of diseases, mostly in Africa and other developing nations. Most of the potent medicinal plants have relatively no toxic or adverse effects when used by humans, while some are very toxic to both humans and animals with the potential of damaging certain organs in the body. This calls for caution in the use of medicinal plants of which the use is presently on the increase due to easy availability, affordability, accessibility, and promising efficacy comparable to the often high cost and adverse effects of standard synthetic drug agents. This chapter highlights some safe medicinal plants with good toxicological profile in laboratory animals and/or cell culture experiment that are qualified for clinical trials in humans. Several medicinal plants were evaluated for their good toxicological profile using online research. After much screening, only those medicinal plants without serious toxic effects in animals and cell culture experiments were chosen and precisely discussed.Poonam Gusain, ... Rajappa Joga, in Preparation of Phytopharmaceuticals for the Management of Disorders, 2021Medicinal plants are the major sources of numerous valuable chemicals and/or drugs. Over 1300 medicinal plants are used in European countries, and out of them, 90% are from wild sources. According to the International Union for Conservation of Nature and the World Wildlife Fund, about 50,000–80,000 of flowering plants are used because of their medicinal values [1, 2]. Also, the National Medicinal Plant Board India has estimated that India has 17,000–18,000 species of flowering plants, out of which 6000–7000 are known to have medicinal application in ancient medicinal systems such as ayurveda, siddha, unani, and homeopathy. About 960 medicinal plants are in trade industry of which only 178 are known to have annual consumption levels of more than 100 MT (metric tons) [3]. The increase in human population and the demand for natural medicines have aggravated the loss of medicinal plant species, 100–1000 times the rate of natural extinction. Although this threat has been known for decades, it has resulted to the increase in loss of species and habitat destruction worldwide [1]. This chapter reviews the advances in the application of tissue culture for the in vitro regeneration of rare endangered or threatened medicinal plants and enhancement of various pharmaceutics, drugs, flavors, colors, and medicinal compound production in medicinal plants.Jean P. Dzoyem, ... Victor Kuete, in Medicinal Plant Research in Africa, 2013Medicinal plants have evolved over the centuries as essential parts of African civilization and are widely recognized today as representing its rich cultural and scientific heritage. The increasing demand for medicinal plant products has renewed interest in the pharmaceutical industry in the production of herbal health care formulations, herbal-based cosmetic products, and herbal nutritional supplements. Thus, in addition to serving medical and cultural functions, medicinal plants in Africa have economic importance. Global and national markets have been growing for medicinal herbs, and significant economic gains are being realized through the sale of medicinal plant products. This chapter aims to provide an overview of the medicinal plant trade in some African countries and to explore its use by local companies. It focuses most of its attention on broad trends, tendencies, and the most common situations in the production and marketing of medicinal plants in African local markets.A. Parsaeimehr, ... R. Parra-Saldívar, in The Microbiology of Skin, Soft Tissue, Bone and Joint Infections, 2017Medicinal plants have been used against various diseases for thousands of years, and 80% of the worldwide population still depends on herbal medicines. The medicinal plants Artemisia nilagirica, Senegalia visco, Hypericum perforatum, Vaccinium microcarpum, and Curcuma longa are a few samples of plants that have been effectively used against skin diseases. This natural source has generously provided us with bioactive molecules, such as artemetin, lupeol, hypericin, hydroquinone, epicatechin, and curcumin, which have been used against acne, atopic dermatitis, skin cancer, and skin pigmentation disorders. This chapter presents a list of medicinal plants traditionally used for curing skin disorders, their bioactive molecules, and their modes of action.Supradip Saha, ... Anirban Dutta, in Natural Products and Drug Discovery, 2018Medicinal plant material is tested for bacterial and fungal residues before being bought by most of the medicine manufacturers; if the product contains levels greater than permitted, they are rejected. Microbes like Escherichia coli or Salmonella are a very common contamination found in medicinal plant materials, which are usually caused by lack of basic cleanliness and hygiene during harvest and primary processing of the farm produce. It is therefore a central theme throughout the good agricultural collection practices (GACPs) guidelines to prevent microbial contamination by means of improved hygiene and cleanliness [3].During its journey from field to shelf, medicinal plant material may come into close contact with many sources of contamination. The risks of contamination with heavy metals, pesticides, and other agrochemicals are a matter of particular concern for growers as well as buyers of medicinal plants. If contaminants of any of these sorts find their way into herbal medicine products, they are likely to cause an adverse health aftermath to the consumer.Adverse health consequences have been reported in a number of cases pertaining to consumers consuming herbal medicines devised from incorrect species of medicinal plants. Guidelines on GACPs for starting materials of herbal origin place serious emphasis on ensuring that medicinal plants are correctly identified so that systems are in place in order to provide herbal medicine manufacturers with the vital assurance that they are buying the intended species material.If herbal/medicinal plants not cultivated in a suitable environment, not harvested at the right time of the calendar year, or if not processed correctly, the consequences are straightforward; the active ingredient content of the medicinal plant material is likely to be lesser in amount, leading to the manufacture of partially effective/ineffective herbal medicines. GACP guidelines for starting materials of herbal origin have explicitly laid down the main principles that should be followed by farmers and collectors to ensure that medicinal plant materials are produced with optimum/maximum levels of active ingredients.“Casual” agricultural and collection practices not only reduce the end quality of the herbal medicines but also affect the production and income of the farmers as well the collectors drastically. Knowhow on the optimization of both quality and extent of production of medicinal plant material vis-à-vis maximization of farmers' income has been provided by GACP guidelines for starting materials of herbal origin.Sustainable collection methods in the wild should be encouraged and taken up as an increasing number of medicinal plant species are on the verge of being endangered or have become endangered in recent times. Medicinal plants collected in a manner that allow the plants to regenerate perennially represents one of the pivotal themes presented or laid out in GACP guidelines for starting materials of herbal origin. Sustainable availability of the plant species may be ensured if this path is followed. In addition, the benefactors of the talisman are not singular in nature as it is not only the medicinal plant collectors who shall have a regular source of income but also the herbal medicine industry.Proper and scientific documentation of activities of the medicinal plant growers as well as collectors is required to trace the medicinal plant material back to its origin. Traceability is a key factor of GACP guidelines; it ensures that problems can be traced back to the root place of occurrence so that timely measures may be taken in response to any recurrence. Traceability is possible only through documentation, which is why documentation is a recurring theme throughout the GACP guidelines for starting materials of herbal origin.The source of a vast majority of medicinal plants is still the wild, which is why collection of plant material is from land that is either owned by the government or a local community (or both the parties are involved) and is subject to local, national, and international codes and regulations. With competition for limited resources increasing, there is increased pressure on collection of medicinal plants in the afore-mentioned areas as well. The GACP guidelines stress the importance of adherence to both traditional and relevant government collection regulations so as to ensure management of common resources in a sustainable mode. The compliance with these norms will also ensure the availability of medicinal plants for household usage of the local communities (Fig. 22.2).Figure 22.2. Basic components of good agricultural practices.Gerald Ngo Teke, Victor Kuete, in Toxicological Survey of African Medicinal Plants, 2014Medicinal plants are used worldwide as an alternative and/or a complementary medicine. Studies on these medicinal plants including pharmacological and toxicological evaluations are essential for drug research and development. The main types of toxicological evaluations include: acute toxicity, subacute toxicity, subchronic toxicity, and chronic toxicity studies. Medicinal plants also can be poisonous, affecting the entire spectrum of organ systems, with some plants containing several toxic principles that affect different systems. Toxic principles can be found in different parts of medicinal plants: leaves, fruits, flowers, roots, and stem bark. In evaluating the acute toxicity or subacute toxicity of medicinal plants, any animal species can be used, though rodents are used most often. Many African plants have undergone toxicity screening in the past three decades. In this chapter, we review more than 50 plants used in African Traditional Medicine (ATM) for several purposes. The criteria of classification their toxicity profile also are summarized. It appears that, though most of the plants in ATM are safe, numbers of them are potentially toxic and caution should be taken when they are used for therapeutic purposes. Some of these plants include Ocimum gratissimum, Pteleopsis hylodendron, Annona senegalensis, Syzigium aromaticum, Murraya koenigii, Sacoglottis gabonensis, and Spathodea campanulata.Afolabi Clement Akinmoladun, ... Ebenezer Olatunde Farombi, in Toxicological Survey of African Medicinal Plants, 2014Medicinal plants are the future of medicine. Phytomedicines are coming to equal prominence with orthodox medicines worldwide. However, some medicinal plants are becoming endangered species. It is interesting to note that many cardioprotective principles have been found in various plants, but these compounds are not going to clinical trials and then ultimately to pharmacy. The focal point of phytotherapy research should be drug development from medicinal plants. Phytochemicals that modulate enzymes that are targets for therapy should be characterized. Identified cardioactive phytochemicals or derived more effective analogues should be synthesized to preserve endangered species. The synergistic bioactivity of phytochemicals in plant extracts often is touted as an advantage that is difficult to replicate by single synthetic drugs. It is our suggestion that “hybrid phytochemicals” that can mimic this synergistic property could be synthesized using templates from plants.Despite advancements in the fight against cardiovascular diseases, it has remained the number one cause of mortality worldwide. Cardioprotective medicinal plants can greatly contribute to stemming the tide of this disease. However, because only a thin line of demarcation exists between a medicinal plant being cardioprotective and its being a poison at times, proper classification and screening is necessary. This information should be available to all users of medicinal plants.African laboratories need to be better equipped to employ newer, better, more sensitive, faster, and at times less costly and cumbersome methods of screening for cardiotoxic and cardioprotective botanicals. Governments should put a proper regulatory framework in place to ensure the safe use of cardioactive plants. Data emanating from research laboratories will be useful in this regard.