1 Abrus precatorius L. Leguminosae Local names: Cam thilo day. day chi chi. cuOm truio. urong ttr dfulg. cam sao (Tay). English names : Jcquirity. lodian liquorice. wild liquorice. crab-eye vine. coral pea. prayer beads. rosary pea. Description: Beautiful perennial climber. Young twigs covered with sparse villi. Leaves paripinnate. alternate; leaflets opposite. increasing slightly in size from the base. Inflorescence in axillary pendunculate raceme; flowers pink. Pod turgid. with a sharp deflected beak. Seeds 3 -
7. ovoid. bright scarlet with a black spot at the hilum. Flowering period: June -August. Distribution: Grows wild in mountainous regions also cultivated. Parts used: The roots. leaves and stem are collected in autumn during the flowering period. They are used fresh or dried. The seeds are toxic and only used externally. Chemical composition: The seeds contain a toxalbumin: (L+) abrio. a glucoside: abralin. a haemagglutinin ; N-methyltryptophan and urease. The roots and leafy stems contain 
glycyrrhizin. Therapeutic uses: The roots. the stem and the leaves arc effective in the treaunenl of coryza. cough. fever. jaundice resulting from viral hepatitis. and intoxications. They are used as an edulcorating agent in composite recipes. The daily dose is 8 to 16g in the form of a decoction. The seeds. very toxic. are applied externally iii an antiseptic and anti-inflammatory poultice to accelerate the bursting of boils and to cure mastitis and galactophoritis. 3 
2 Abutilon indicum (L.) Sweet Malvaceae Local names: COi xay, giilng xay, quynh rna, co t6 ep (Inai), phao tiin (fay). English names: Country mallow, Indian mallow, Indian abutilon. Description: Perennial shrub, hoary-steUate tomenlDse, l-l.5m. high. Leaves alLernate, cordale, IOOlhed, long-pctioled. Rowers yellow, solitary in !he axil of lhe leaves ; pedicel long, jointed near lhe lOp. Carpels numerous, hairy, dark brown. Seeds renifoom, glabrous, dull blacle. Flowering period: February -April. Distribution: Wild and cultivated species. Parts used: The whole plant is coUccted in summer and autumn and used fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The whole plant conlains mucilaginous substances and asparagine. The seeds yield rafrmose and a semi-drying oil consisting of linoleic, oleic, palmitic and slearic acids. Therapeutic uses: The roots and leaves are employed in the treaUTIent of coryza, hypcrlheomia, headache, dysuria and mctrorrhoea, in a daily dose of 4 to 8g of dried plant maLerial in lhe foom of a decoction. The juice of pounded fresh leaves and seeds internally applied is active on furunculosis, dysentery and snalce-biLe ; lhe residue is used for poultices. The dose of seeds is 8 to 12g per day. A combination with some olhcrplants is prescribed for jaundice and certain post-partum diseases. 5 
3 -------------Acanthopanax trifoliatus (L.) Merr. Araliaceae Local names: Ngu gia bi gai, nga gia bi huung, pop tun, pop dinh (Tay), CO nam sliT (TtuIi). Description: Rigid shrub, diffuse. Stems ascending, spiny. Leaves alternate, 3 -5 
-palmifotiate; leaflelS with margins toothed and s
pines on the nerves. Inflorescence in terminal panicle of some umbels ; flowers small, greenish-white. Fruit globose, black w
hen ripe. AU parIS of the plant are particularly fragranl Flowering period: September -November. 'DislribUJion: Grows wild in mountainous regions, occasionally found on the forest-edge. ParIS used: The root bark and s
tem bark are collected in summer and autumn. The bark is wrapped to bring out the aroma then subjected to thorough air-drying. Chemical composilion : The root bark and stem bark contain triterpenoid saponins and oleanolic acid. TherapeUJic uses: The root bark and stem bark are prescribed in the treatment of rheumatism, lumbago, ostealgia and impotence. The drug is also considered as a central nervous system stimulant and tonic. It improves the memory. The usual dose is 6 to 12g per day in the form of a decoction or tincture. 7 
r--5 Achyranthes bidentala Blume Amaranthaceae Local names : NgU1l hoai ngU1l tit. Description : Perennial herbaceous 6O-8<km. high. Tuberous roots long, cylindrical. Stems angular, swollen al the nodes. Leaves opposite, eUiptic to linear-lanceolate, short-petioled, with margins undulate. Inflorescence in terminal spike ; flowers greenish-white, numerous, deflected against the rachis. Utricle oblong-cylindrical, one-seeded. Flowering period: May -July. DistribuJion : An introduced species, it is cultivated in the plains. Parts used: The tuberous roots, collected in winter and spring, are exposed to the sun until half-dried, then wrapped up for 7 days until the sldn is seamed with wrinkles. They are subjected to sulfur fumigation and further drying. The drug is normally used unprocessed but sometimes before being used it is soaked in alcohol and torrefied until it becomes yellow. Chemical composition : The tuberous roots contain triterpenoid saponins, the genin of which is oleanolic acid ; ecdysterone, inokosterone, stigmasterol. TherapeuJic uses : The roots possess anti-inflammatory, hcholesterolaemic, hypotensive and uterotonic properties. The drug is indicated for rheumatism, lumbago, dysmenorrhoea, hypertension, hypercholesterolacmia, atherosclerosis, dysuria, haematuria, contusions, congestion and sore throat It is also used as an oxytocic in dystocia, placenta retention and post-partum haematometra. It is prescribed in a dose of 6 to 12g per day in the form of a decoction. 11 
6 Aconitum fortunei Hemsl. Ranunculaceae Local names: 6 <lAu, col gilu tau, tir, c5 y (H'mong), co Ii tau (ThAi). Description: Perennial herbaceous plant, O.6-lm. high. Roots paired, tuberous, conical with mother-tuber and daughter-tuber. Stem erect, cylindrical, glabrous. Leaves of two kinds : the lower cordate, crenated ; the upper 3-palmatipartite, sharply denticulate. Inflorescence in terminal raceme; flowers blue. Follicles: 5, sessile, oblong, divergent. Sccds winged. Flowering period: October -November. Distribution: Grows wild in the high mountains. Paris used: The tuberous roots are collected 
in autumn before the plant flowers, and sun-dried. Chemical composition : The tuberous roots contain the alkaloid aconitine. Therapeulic uses : The tuberous roots are used in treating rheumatism, paresis, arthralgia, 
luxation, sprains and contusions. Their tincture is used as liniment It must not be taken by mouth, because of its high toxicity. 13 
7 Acorus gramineus Solander Araceae Local names: Th')Ch Xtr01lg 1>6. 1>6 1>6. 1>6 hoang. khinh cha nijrn (Thai). lAy nijrn (Tay). J<inh pAu cM (Dao). English name : Grass-leaved sweet rush. Description : Perennial semi-aquatic herb. Rhizome aromatic. creeping and much-branched. Leaves long and amplexicaul. in fascicles ; principal nerves parallel. Inflorescence in spike on a compressed scape. surrounded by a long bract; flowers small. bisexual. Berry bright-red when ripe. Other species. such as Acorus calamus L. and A. gramineus Soland. var. pusillus Engl. are also used medicinally. Flowering period: March -June. Distribution: Grows wild on the banks of mountain streams. Parts used: The rhizomes. collected in autumn and winter. are sun-dried or heat-dried. The leaves are also used. Chemical composition : The rhizome contains an essential oil consisting of asaron and asaryl aldehyde; and a bitter glucoside. acorin. Therapeutic uses : The rhizome possesses pectoral. stomachic and sedative properties. It is utilized in the therapy of diarrhoea, gastralgia. cough. bronchial asthma, neurasthenia. fever. convulsions. rheumatism. osteodynia and arrhythmia. The daily dose is 3 to 8g in the form of a decoction. powder and pills. for a period of 1 to 2 months. External application is effective for dermatosis and haemorrhoids. It is also used as an insecticide for killing lice. bugs and fleas. 15 
8 Acronychia laurifolia Blume Rut.ce.e Local names: BuUi bung, bAi Mi, cUt sat, moc thaD sang (TAy), co dQng (Thai), cO neng (K'ho). English name: Clawflowered laurel. Description: Small tree, I -
3m. tall Dr more, much-branched. Leaves opposite, oblong or obovate, entire, coriaccous, glabrous : petiole long. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal corymb : flowers white, fragrant. Drupe globose, obscurely angular, pale-yellow when ripe, edible. Flowering period: July -September. Distribution : Grows wild in the midlands and the mountainous regions. Parts used : The roolS, twigs, stem bark and leaves arc collected throughout the year. The planlS are pulled up, stripped of rootlelS, carcfully washed and sliced. Selected leaves, not worm-ealcn Dr withered, arc sun-dried or heat-dried. The stem bark is used only externally. Therapeutic uses: The roolS are utilized in the therapy of rheumatism, lumbago, pain in the limbs, post-partum blood stasis, furunculosis, impetigo and snake-bite. The dosage is 8 to 20g per day, in thcform of a decoction or elixir. The torrefied rOOlS Dr leaves arc effective as a stomachic for dyspepsia in panurienlS in a daily dose of 6 to 12g as a decoction. A poultice made of heated leaves and a wash with a decoction of the trunk bark are useful for furunculosis and impetigo. 17 
9 Adenosma indianum (Lour.) Merr. Scrophulariaceae Local names: Bf> bb, che df>ng, che nQi, che cAt. Description: Annual herb, 20 -6Ocm. high. Stems ereel Young twigs at frrst pubescent, finally glabrous. Leaves opposite, shon-petioled, lanceolate, pubescent; margins toothed. Inflorescence terminal in a son of head; flowers violet. Capsule with numerous seeds. Flowering period: April-July. Distribution: Commonly found wild in mountainous regions, especially on hillsides and field-edges. Parts used: The whole plant is collected in summer during its flowering period. It is carefully washed then subjected to thorough air-drying. Chemical composition : The plants contain triterpenoid saponins, phenolic acids, coumarins a
nd flavonoids. The volatile o
il from the plant consists of LJenchone 35%, limonene 22.6%, cineol 5.9%, pipcritenon oxide and sesquiterpene oxide. Therapeutic uses : The whole plant, except the roots, constitutes an antibacterial, cholagogic, diuretic and' stomachic remedy. It is useful for the treaunent of jaundice in viral hepatitis, oliguria, biliuria, fever, ophthalmalgia, vertigo and dyspepsia in panurients. It is prescribed in a daily dose o( 10 to 20g in the form of a decoction, extract or 19 
10 Ageratum conyzoides L. Compositae Local names: CAy clhlqn, bU xfch, 00 Mi, th&1g hAng hat bO (K'ho). English names: White weed, appa grass, conyzoid floss· flower, bastard agrimony. DeSCription : Annual herb, 30·SOcm. high. Stem erecl, hairy, green or purple. Leaves opposite, broadly ovate, crenate, 
coarsely hairy on both sides, 3·nerved at the base. The inflorescence is a terminal corymb of many small heads ; flowers violet or white. Achene minute, black, 5-echinate. Flowering period: Throughout the year. Distribution: Common weed everywhere. Parts used: The whole plant, except the roots, is collected throughout the year. It is used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: The plant yields 0.7·2% essential oil consisting of ageratochromene, dimethoxy -ageratochromene, cadinene and caryophyllene ; it also contains alkaloids and saponins. Therapeutic uses : The whole plant possesses anti·infiammalOry and antiallergic properties. The juice from the fresh plant and the extract of the dried plant are used for the cure of allergic rhinitis and sinusitis, in aqueounolution for nasal instiUation. The juice of the fresh plant is also useful in post·partum uterine haemorrhage. The usual dose is 30 10 50g of fresh plant per day. A halr·wash consisting of a decoction of the fresh plant makes the hair fragrant, soft and dandruff· free. 21 
11 Alisma plantago-aquatica L Alismataceae Local names : t3., dA nU'6c. English names: Common water plantain. mad-dog weed. Description: Marsh herb. 4O-5Ocm. high. Rhizome stout, globular. Leaves entire. long-petioled, forming a roselle ; nerves curved. Inflorescence in terminal umbelliform cyme; scape long. flowers white. cylindrical. Fruit: in akene. Flowering period: October -November. DistribUJion : Wild and cultivated species in rice-swamps and ponds. Parts used: TIle rhizomes. collected in autumn. are sun-dried or heat-dried. They are soaked in alcohol or in salt solution. then torrefied until they tum yeUow before use. Chemical composition : The rhizomes contain an essential oil consisting of a1isol A. B. C and epialisol A ; D
-glucose. D-fructose. sucrose; lecithin. choline. resin. protein and slarch. TherapeUJic uses: The rhizome is diuretic and used in treating oedema, nephritis. dysuria, haemaluria. pollakiuria, urodynia, urinary lithiasis. flatulence. vomiting and diarrhoea It is administered in a dose of 8 to 16g per day in the form of a decoction or pills. It is likewise prescribed as an antidiabetic and as a galactagogue in hypogalactia. 23 
12 Allium flStulosum L. Liliaceae Local names: H1mh, thOng hom biia (Thai), sOng (Dao). English names: Japanese leek, Welsh onion, cibol, stone leek. Description : Glabrous bulbous herb, 20-4Ocm. high, possessing a strong pungent aromatic odour. Leaves cylindrical, hollow, linear, oblong·acuminate at the apex. Inflorescence on the top of a long stalk in umbel forming a large globular head; flowers small, white. Capsule with numerous seeds, minute. trigonal, black. Flowering period: August -October. Distribution : Extensively cultivated as a culinary herb throughout the country. Parts used: The bulbs, collected in winter and spring, arc used fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The bulbs contain essential oil. The constituents of the crude oil areaUyl propyl disulfide, diallyl disulfide and sulfur compounds. Therapeutic uses : The whole plants, especially the bulbs, possess neurosrimulan!, stomachic and antibacterial propenies. They arc eITective in the treatment of coryza, influenza, headache, fever, dyspepsia, intestinal infeetions, rheumatism, toOthache, furunculosis and dysuria. The daily dose is 30 to 60g of fresh herb, in the form of a decoction, extracted juice orhotgrue!. A poultice of pounded fresh bulbs is effective in treating furunculosis, especially axillary and inguinal boils. Inhalation of the vapour from a boiling decoction is active on coryza, influenza and fever. 25 
13 Allium odorum L. Liliaceae Local names : phi tir. ciru tMj. phil!<: cat ng1m (ThlIi). English names : Sweet leek, fragrant-flowered garlic. Chinese chives. Description: Bulbous herb. 15-35cm. high. tufty. Leaves linear. flat, acuminate. Flowers white. in umbel on the top of a trigonal stalk. arising from the bulb. Capsule with black seeds. All parts of the herb are acrid-flavoured. Flowering period: July -October. Distribution: Cultivated as a culinary and medicinal planL Parts used: The bulbs and leaves are collected throughout the year but aurumn and winter are the best harvesting time. The seeds. collected from the ripe fruit, are sun-dried or heat-dried before use. Chemical composition : The leaves and bulbs contain sulfur compounds. saponins and bitter substances. The seeds yield saponins and alkaloids. Therapeutic uses : The leaves and the bulbs possess antibacterial properties. They are useful for the treaunent of haemoptysis. epistaxis. cough. sore throat, asthma. haemalOmetra, dyspepsia. dysentery and oxyuriasis. The usuaJ dose is 20 10 30g per day in the fonn of a decoction. They are also used in an anti-inflammalOry poultice. The seeds are active on spennatorrhoea, haematuria. incontinence. lumbago. arthrodynia and mettorrhoea'. The usuaJ dose is 6to 12g per day in the fonn of a decoction. 27 
I 14 Allium salivum L. Liliaceae Local names: Toi, toan, hom Ida (Thai), sluon ('Thy). English name: Garlic. Description: Annual, glabrous, bulbous herb with pungent odour. Bulb short. consists of several smaller bulbs (called cloves) and is surrounded by a thin, white or pinkish sheath. Leaves flat and narrow, attenuate-acute at the apex; nerves parallel. Flowers white or pink with bulbils in globose head covered with a large bract Flowering period: August-November. Distribution: Cultivated allover the country for culinary use. Parts used: The bulbs, collected at the end of winter or the beginning of spring,are used in fresh or dried form. Chemical composition : The essential oil obtained from the bulbs contains allicin, diallyl disulfide, allyl propyl disulfide and othcr sulfur compounds. Therapeutic uses : The bulb constitutes an antibacterial, inflammatory and anthelmintic remedy. It is employed in the treatment of bacillary dysentery and amoebiasis. A rccUll injection of 100 ml of 5 t
o 10% solution is effective for oxyuriasis and colitis. The 20% tincture cures cough, bronchitis and pertussis. The aqueous solution of bulb juice in a nasal instillation and a gruel made with the bulbs are active on coryza and influenza. It is also hypocholcsterolaemic and thus useful in cholesterolaemia and atherosclerosis. A poulticc of pounded bulb is used to treat boils, abscesses, phlegmons and centipede bites. 29 
15 Alocasia macrorrhiza (L.) Schott Araceae Local names: Ray, khoai sap, v.,o co (l'hai). English names: Big· rooted taro, giant alocasia, giant taro, kopeh rOOl Description : Perennial herb, O.S·lm. high. Rhizome cylindrical, long, stout, with many nodes. Leaves large, ovate Ł cordate with long stalks, surrounding the stem; margins wavy. Inflorescence in spadix, bearing male flowers above and female below. Berry ovoid, red when ripe. Flowering period: January· May. Distribution: Grows wild in forests and mountains. Parts used: The leaves and rhizomes are collected throughout the year. The leaves are used fresh. The rhizomes are boiled hard to reduce itching compounds, then sun·dried or heat·dried. Chemical composition : The rhizomes contain phytosterols, alkaloids, glucose and fructose. Therapeutic uses: The leaves and the rhizome are prescribed for the treatment of impetigo, furunculosis, phlegmon and snake·bire in the form of a liquid extract for administration by mouth, and their residue is used for poulticing. They are also used in treating colic and vomiting, in a daily dose of 10 to 20g of dried rhizome in the form of a decoction. Their external usc as a plaster is effective against furunculosis. 31 
16 Alpinia galanga (L.) Wi lid. Zingiberaccae Local names: Rieng, rieng am, rieng nep, (1Mi). English names: Grealer galangal, Siamese ginger, Java galangal, Siamese galangal. Description : Perennial herbaceous plant. I-2m. high. Rhizome cylindrical, SlOut. aromatic, covered 
with scales. Leaves allemate, lanccolate, lower pan surrounding the Slem, the upper face g
labrous and shining. Inflorescence in terminal dense raceme 20-3Ocm. long; flowers white, lip veined with red. Fruil globose or ovoid. Flowering period: May -Seplember. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the mountains and is c
ullivaled everywhere. Parts used: The rhizomes may be collecled throughout the year, bUl preferably in aUlumn and winter, and arc sun -dried or h
eal -dried before use. Chemical composition: The rhizome yields an essenlial oil consisting of cineol. methyl cinnamate and navones: galangin, alpin in, kaempferide and 3 -dioxy 4-melhoxy navone. TherapeUlic uses: The rhizome is an anlibaclerial agent and a digeslive stimulant. It is indicaled in the treatment of dyspepsia, natulence, vomiting, gastralgia, colic, diarrhoca and malaria fever, in a daily dose of 3 to 6g, in the form of a decoction, powder or elixir. Il is also applied externally on carious teeth lO cure loothache. 33 
1 17 Alstonia scholaris (L.) R. Hr. Apocynaceae Local names: Sihl, mb cua, mila cua, man (TIly), co tin pfit (Thai). English names: Dita -bark tree, devil's tree. Description : A large evergreen tree, about 15m. high. Bark greyish-brown, thick, lenticellate, much fluted. Leaves oblong, rounded at the apex, 3-8 -verticillate, but usually crowded at the end of branches ; secondary nerves parallel. Inflorescence in umbelliform cyme; flowers small, greenish -white with a strong smell. Follicles long and narrow. Seeds brown, tipped with a coma of hairs at both ends. All parts of the tree contain a milky juice. Flowering period: September -October. Distribution: Grows wild in the mountains and is cultivated as a shade tree. ParIS used: The trunk bark, collected in spring and summer, is sun-dried or heat-dried. Chemical composition : The bark contains alkaloids: ditaine, echitenine, echitamine (ditamine) and echitamidine together with triterpcnes: a -amyrin and lupecl. Therapeutic uses: The bark yields a t
onic and antiseptic medicine. [t is used to treat anaemia, menstrual disorders, malarial fever, colic, diarrhoea, dysentery and acute arthritis. The dosage is I to 3g per day, in the form of a decoction, powder, elixir or extracL A 
concentrated decoction of trunk bark is used as a wash in furunculosis and impetigo, and as a gargle in dental caries. 35 
18 Amomum aTomaticum Roxb. Zingiberaceae Local names; No qua, dO ho, m
ac Mu (Thai). English names; Bengal cardamom, Nepal cardamom. Description: Tall perennial herb, 2-3m. high. Root -stock horizonml with many nodes. Leaves linear, sessile, lower part surrounding the stem. Infloreseence in radical spike; flowers red. Fruit ovoid, 3 -valved, crimson. Seeds numerous, angular, with a pronounced fragrance. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlion : Wild or cultivated in wet places in the forest highlands. Parts used: The fruit, collected in winter, is s
un -dried or h
eat -dried. The pcricarp is removed before use. Chemical composition: Essential oil from seeds 1 -1.5%. TherapeUlic uses : The seeds have antibacterial and stomachic properties. They are used to alleviate dyspepsia, natulence, colic, vomiting, diarrhoea and cough, in a daily dose of 3 to 6g in the form of a decoction, powder or pills. They are also prescribed as a gargle or mouth-wash or for perlingual administration t
o treat toothache, gingivitis and paradontosis. They are also used for navouring cakes. 37 
19 Amomum villosum Lour. Zingiberaceae Local names: Sa nhan, mt duung XU"" sa, co ntnh (Thai), moc m\ng (Uy), pa (K'dong), la ve (Ba Na). English names: Malabar cardamom, Tavoy cardamom. Description: Perennial herb, O.5-l.Sm. high. Root-stock h
oriwntal, slender. Leaves a1temate,linear, amplexicaul, acute-anenuate at the apex. Innorescence in radical raceme; nowers white, lip yellow, spoUed with purple. Capsule 3-valved, with soft spines, bmwn red when ripe. Flowering period: May -June. Distribution: Grows wild in shady places in the mountains. Parts used: The fruit is collected in summer and autumn and dried before the seeds are removed for use. Chemical composition: The essential oil from the seeds consists of D-camphor, D-borncol, D-bomyl acetate, D-limonene, u-pinene, phellandrene, paramethoxyethyl cinnamate, nerolidol and linalol. The seeds also contain liquiritin and glucovanillic acid. Therapeutic uses : The seeds possess antibacterial and stomachic properties. They are utilized in dyspepsia, colic, natulence, diarrhoea, vomiting and oedema. The usual daily dose is 2 to 6g in the form of a decoction, powder or pills. They are a constituent of composite recipes against threatened abortion. They are also active against toothache if the maceration or the powder are applied to carious patches on the teeth. 39 
20 Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f.) Nees Local names: Xuyen ram lien, cong c9ng. English names: Crem, kariyaL Acanthaceae Description : Erect annual herb, 0.4 -1m. high. Stems quadrangular, much-branched. Leaves opposite, shon-petioled, oblong-auenuate at both ends, glabrous, pale beneath. Inflorescence in few-flowered axillary and terminal raccme or panicle; flowers white with pink spots. Capsule lincar-{)blong, acute at both ends, pubescent. Seeds numerous, oblong, glabrous. Flowering period: September -January. Distribution: Species cultivated everywhere, especially in the south. Parts used: The whole plants, especially the leaves, arc collected in summer and sun-dried or h
eat-dried. Chemical composition: The plant contains bitter andrographolide, ncoandrographolide, panaculoside, andrographin, panicalin, apigenin 7-4 -dimethyl ether. glucosides : flavonoids, Therapeutic uses: The whole plants, principally the leaves, possess antibacterial. anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive propcnics. The leaves are used in treating dysentcry, diarrhoea, enteritis, fcvcr, coryza, cough, sore throat, tonsillitis, bronchitis, osteodynia, arthralgia. menstrual and post-panum haematometra, scrofula, hypenension and snake-bite. iO to 20g of dried plant in the form of a decoction or 2 to 4g of dried leaves in the form of a powder or pills are administered daily. Thcy are also used in a poultice for phlcgmon and snake-bite. 41 
r 21 Angelica daburica (F' cb.ex HofTm.) Bentb. et Hook.f. Umbelliferae , Local n
ame.s: humlg chi. phlroTlg humlg. English name: Dilhurian angelica. , . Descriprion: Stout perennial h
erbaceous plant 1m. or m
ore in height Stems cylindrical. hollQw.· greenish or violet-pink. Leaves large. 2-3-pinnate. fine downy above, margins toothed. Inflorescence in tenninal or axillary compoWld umbel ; flowers small. white. Fruit c
ompressed. globose. about 6 mm. long .. ' , Flowering period: J\ll1e. Distribution .: Natural,ized in the mOWltains and on the plains. Paris used ,: The. tubers are collected in autumn, avoiding scratches to the tuber skin and the br.eakage of Roots of r
eproductive plants are rejected. The tubers" are care
fully washed and the radicles are removed. This is followed 1>y sulfur fumigation f
or 24h, then sun-drying Or heat-drying. .Ł Chemical The essential oil from the roots and fruits consists of p
heUandrene. resins 1%. angelicotoxin 0.43%. angelicin. angelic acid and furocoumarins. Therapeutic The tuberous roots are used for the treatment of f
ever. influenza. coryza. tooth·ache. rheumatism. ostealgia and leucorrhoea. They are used as a haemostatic Jor epistaxis and bloody stools. in the fonn of a decoction or 'in a dose of 4 to 12g per day. , 43 
22 Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels Umbelliferae Local names: Buong qui, tftn qui, ean qui. Description'.' Perennial herbaceous 40 -6Ocm. high. Stems striate. pale violet Leaves alternate. amplexicaul, 3 -
4 -pinnate ; margins tootlle<!. Inflorescence in dense terminal umbel; flowers small, white. Fruit compressOO. All parts of the especially tile roots, have a special scent Flowering period.' June -August. DistribUlion .' Introduce<! species, cultivate<! in many places. PariS used.' The roolS of tile 2 or 3-year-old planlS are collected In autumn and winter. The radiclcs arc removed. The TOOLS arc air-dried or lightly heat-dried until completely dry. Chemical composition.' The roolS yield an essential oil consisting of ligustilid, butylidenephtl1alide, bergapten, safrol, p-cymene, sesquiterpcne, dodecanol, tetradccanol and vitamin B12. TherapeUlic uses.' The root has marke<! reslOrative, antianaemic and haemagogic properties. It is recommended for treating anaemia, general debility, headache, fatigue, lumbago, chest pains, colic, constipation, paresis, furunculosis, impetigo, contusions, menstrual disorders and dysmenorrhoea. The dosc is 10 10 20g per day in ille form of a decoction or elixir. In tile case of menstrual disorders, tile drug is taken a weck before menstruaLion. 45 
23 Areca catechu L. Palmaceae Local names: Cau, binh lang, IAn lang, lang pcr (K'ho). English names: Betel-nut palm, areca-nut palm, betel palm, areca palm, penang palm, catechu palm. Description: Slender palm about \Om. tall. Stem erect, sunnoumed by a crown of pinnate leaves ; petiole broadly expanded at the base. Inflorescence in spadix encased in a spathe; flowers yellowish-white in much-branched raceme, which bears both male and female flowers. Fruit ovoid; pericarp hard and fibrous; kernel (seed) brown. Flowering period: May -December. Distribution: Cultivated everywhere. Parts used: The pericarps and kernels are used. Over-ripe fruit is collected. The pericarps and kernels are taken separately and sun-dried or heat-dried. Chemical composition: The kernels yield tannin, catechin (70% in the young fruit, 15 -20% in the over-ripe fruit), lipids consisting of laurin, olein and myristin ; glucides 50 -60% ; alkaloids : arecoline, arecaidine, arecaine, guvacine and guvacoline. Therapeutic uses : The pericarp is effective in the treaunent of flatulence, oedema, dysuria and hyperaemesis of pregnancy. Its decoction is prescribed in a dose of 6 to 12g per day. The kernel is used to treat diarrhoea, and dysentery in a daily dose of 0.5 to 4g. It is also a taenifuge. It is also said to cure malaria. Arecoline induces pupillary contraction and decreases ocular tension in glaucoma. 47 
I 24 Aristolocbia roxburghiana Klotsch Aristolochiaceae Local names: Ma !Illu Iinh, day kh6 rkh, phi hung, cu6p rna (H'm6ng). Description: Slender climbing vine. Stems woody at the base, grooved, glabrous. Leaves alternate, long-petioled ; base cordate, acuminate at the apex. Inflorescence in axillary raceme; bract small ; flowers numerous, purplish-brown ; perianth curved, mouth oblique. Capsule ovoid, splitting into 6 valves. Seeds numerous, deltoid, flat and winged. Flowering period: March· June. DistribUlion : Grows wild in mountainous regions. PariS used: The roots may be collected throughout the year, but preferably in autumn. They are sun-dried or heat-dried before use. TheiapeUlic uses: The roots are stomachic and are used in the treatment of colic, gastritis, enteritis, diarrhoea, dysentery, food poisoning, furunculosis, rheumatism, oedema and dysmenorrhoea. The daily dose is 6 to 12g in the form of a decoction or powder. A combination with some other plants is said to cure malaria. 49 
2S Armeniaca vulgaris Lam. Rosaceae Loca1 names: MO', mai, rna pheng (TMi), mAc mbi (fay). English name: Apricot Description : SmaU tree, 3·5m. high. Leaves alternate, obscurely cordate at the base, apex pointed ; margins toothed. Flowers white, appearing before the leaves. Drupe round-ovate, velvety pubescent when young, nearly glabrous at maturity, with a yellow skin ; stone hard, irregularly furrowed. Flowering period: January· February. DiscribUlion : Cultivated as a fruit·tree with medicinal fruit. PariS used: The fruit is picked in early summer and used fresh or salted and dried. Chemical composilion : The fruit contains organic acids: citric, tartaric, pangamic carotenoids : Iycopene, a· carotene; flavonoids : quercetin, isoquercetin ; vitamins A and C. The fruit kernels yield fixed oil, enzyme, amygdalin and emulsin. TherapeUlic uses : The salted fruit is used as an antiseptic and anti-inflammatory in respiratory and digestive di.seases. It is used in the trealment of cough, dyspnoea, asthma, laryngitis, sore throat, ascariasis, dysentery and persistent diarrhoea. The daily dose is 4 to 8g administered perlingually or in pills. The liquid distilled from the seed kernels is toxic and active against cough, dyspnoea and gastralgia, in a daily dose of 1 to 4 ml. The oil from the seed kernels is used as a laxative, in the form of an emulsion with water. 51 
I 26 Artemisia vulgaris L. Compositae Local names: Ngai clhl, ngili 1l1U0c clhl, nha ngai (Tay), qua sli (H'mOng), co linh Ii (Thai). English names: Wormwood, mugwon, Oeabane, felon herb, motherwon, sailor's tobacco. Description.' Aromatic, perennial herb, 0.4 -1m. high. Young lwigs pubescent Leaves alternate, pinnalely lobed, dark-green above, white-grey and pubescent benealh. InOorescence in drooping small head of terminal, compound raeeme ; Oowers greenish-yellow. Achene minule, oblong-ellipsoid. Flowering period.' Oclober -December. Distribution .' Grows wild in mountainous regions ; generally cultivaled for medicinal purposes. Parts used.' The whole plant exeepl the rooLS is collected in spring and summer before Oowering. Il is used fresh or in air-<lried form. Chemical composition .' The essential oil from the planl consisls of cineol, a -thujone, dihydro matricaria ester, letradecatrilin, tricosanol, arachyl alcohol. In addition to the essential oil, il also contains adenine and choline. Therapeutic uses.' The entire planl. excepl the rooLS, is used as a haemagogie, antispasmodic and haemostatic. Il is used lO treal menstrual disorders, leucorrhoea, threalened abortion, haemorrhagic dysentery, haemopl)'sis, epistaxis, metrorrhagia, vomiling, colic, neUralgia, rheumatism and impetigo. The daily dose is 610 12g in the form of a decoction, extracl or pills. The young leaves are used as a caulery lo relieve neuralgia. In trealing menstrual disorders, the planl is adminislered a week before menstruation. 53 
27 Asarum maximum Hemsl. Aristolochiaceae Local names: Hoa tien, <!Au tien, uau lien. Description: Perennial herb, 20 -3Ocm. high. Leaves long-cordate, glabrous, aCUle at the apex ; peliole long, arising from the rhizome. Flowers lubular, brownish-grey, solitary in the axil of the leaves. Fruil enveloped in an accrescem perianth, bearing numerous seeds of dark-brown colour. Flowering period: April-June. Distribution: Wild species in moisl places. ParIS used : The whole plan!, collected throughout the year, is sun-dried or heal-dried before use. Chemical composition: The flowers contain anthocyanoside. Therapeutic uses: The flowers and !he roolS are a in a dose of 6 to 12g per day, in a decoction or elixir. The leaves are administered. in a dose of 10 to 16g per day againsl dyspepsia and colic. 55 
28 Asparagus cochinchinensis (Lour.) Merr. LiIiaceae Local names: Thien mon, thien mon dong, t6c tien leo, co sin SlI'O'Tlg (Thai), mk sam ('Thy), sua sol tUng (H'mong), du mao siam (Dao). Description: Perennial scandent shrub with ruberous roots. Stems glabrous, spinous. Branchlets reduced to leaves (cladophylls). falciform, angular. Howers white, small. arising in the Icaf-axils. Berry globose, pale-green at ftnally white. Seeds black. Flowering period: May -July. Distribution : Grows wild among shrubs on the sea-coast also cultivated as an ornamental planL Parts used: The roots. collected in winter and spring. are soaked in water or steamed and then sun-dried. The cores are removed and the roots are then soaked in alcohol and heat-dried before usc. Chemical composition: The roots contain asparagine, mucilage, starch and sugars. Therapeutic uses : The root possesses pectoral. antitussive, diuretic and reconstituent properties. It is indieated in the Ireaunent of persistent cough, haemoptysis, dry throat, fever, dysuria and constipation. It is also effective in neurasthenia. The daily dose is 8 to 16g in a powdcrorelixir. It is often a constituent of composite restorative recipes, together with Codonopsis javanica and Rehmannia glutinosa. 57 
r 29 Atractylodes macrocephala Koidz. Compositae Local name: Description : Perennial h
erbaceous 40 Ł 6Ocm. high. S
tems cylindrical, much-branched in the upper part. Leaves alternate, toothed, the lower 3-lobcd with long petiole, the upper entire, short-petioled. Inflorescence in terminal head; flowers small, lilac, all tubulous. Achene globose, with a coma of hairs. Flowering period: August-October. DislribUlion : An introduced species, thriving at an altitude of 1000 -15OOm. Paris used: The rhizomes are collected in November when the lower leaves begin withering. They arc stripped of the small roolS and sun-dried or heat-dried. Chemical COmposilion : The rhizomes contain essential oil 1.5%, atractylol, atractylon ; glucoside, inulin, vitamin A, potassium atractylate. TherapeUlic uses: The rhizome is used in treating various digestive diseases for ilS peptic, antiulcer, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic activity. It is used in the treatment of gastritis, peptic ulcer, hepatic hypofunction, dyspepsia, vomiting, lientery, chronic enteritis, colic in pregnant women and diaphorcLic fever. It is also as a diuretic, antitussive and hypoglycaemic remedy, useful for the treatment of oedema and diabetes mellitus. The daily dose is 6to 12g in a decoction, powder or extract 59 
30 Baeckea frulescens L. Myrlaceae Ł , 1 Local names: Ch6i xue, choi thanh hao. Description: Small tufty shrub, about 1m. high. Stems slender, rigid, much·branched ; bark brown. Leaves opposite, very narrow, caducous ; main nerve conspicuous. Flowers white, soutary in the .axil of the leaves. Capsule small; seeds angular. All parts of the plant are strongly seented. Flowering perwd : April· June. DistribuJion : Grows wild on arid soils in the mountains and the midlands. Parts used: The whole except the roots. It is collected from July to OclOber during its flowering period and sun-dried or heat-dried. The essential oil is obtained from the plant by distillation. Chemical composition: The whole plant yields 0.76% essential oil, consisting of cineol, pinene, linalol and limonene. TherapeuJic uses : The whole except the roots, possesses antibacterial, antifebrile and haemostatic propenies. It is indicated in the therapy of coryza. influenza, headache, measles, couc and jaundice, in the form of a fumigation of the dried plant or the inhalation of vapour from a boiling decoction of the fresh plant. It is also prescribed against epistaxis, impetigo, dyspepsia, haemorrhagic dysentery and menstrual disorders, in a doseof8 to 16g per day in a decoction. It isapplied externally as an antiseptic in treating furunculosis and impetigo. The essential oil tincture is used for massage in cases of rheumatism. 61 
I· 31 Belamcanda chinensis (L.) DC. Iridaceae Local names: Re can, hrO; dbng, co phi (Thai). English names: Leopard lily, leopard flower, blackberry lily. Description: Perennial herbaceous ·plant, 0.5 Ł 1m. high. Rhizome horizontal, creeping, much-branched. Leaves linear. amplexicaul and distichous, forming a fan; nerves closely parallel. Flowers orange, spotted with purple. Fruit ovoid, bearing numerous seeds, shiny black. Flowering period: July -October. DistribuJion : Cultivated as an ornamental plant. Parts used: The rhizomes, collected in autumn, are used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: The rhizomes contain glucosidcs : belamcandin, tectoridin, shekanin and iridin. TherapeuJic uses: The rhizome is well-known for its antibacterial, inflammatory, antifebrile and expectorant properties. It is prescribed in the treatment of cough, sore throat, tonsillitis, laryngitis and penussis. It is also effective for fever, dysmenorrhoea, dyschezia, dysuria, mastitis, galactophoritis, otalgia and snake-bite. The usual daily dose is 3 to 6g of dried rhizome in a decoction, or 10 to 20g of fresh rhizome pounded with a little salt, for perlingual administtation. 63 
32 Berberis wallichiana DC. Bcrbcridaceae Local names: lien gai, mil, hoang mC)c. English names: Wallich's barberry, Wallich's berberis. Description: Erect evergreen shrub, much·branched, 2 -
3m. high; bark greyish; wood yellow. Stems rigid, downy when young. Leaves in tufts of 2 -5, narrow, subsessile, having branched spines at the base; margins sharply toothed. Howers in short-stalked raceme, yellow, axillary. Berry ovoid, red at first, turning black on ripening. Flowering period: May -July. Distribution: Grows wild in the hills up to 1500m. Parts used: The roots, collected in autumn, arc sun-dried or heat-dried. Chemical composition: The roots contain alkaloids : berberine, oxyacanthine and umbellantine. Therapeutic uses: The roots possess antibaclCrial properties and arc useful for treating diarrhoea, dysenlCry, ophthalmia and dyspepsia. They arc available in decoction, powder or tablet form and arc administered orally in doses of 4 to 6g per day. The alcoholic maceration i
s employed as a gargle for toothache and is orally adminislCrcd for headache, vertigo and photopsia. 65 
33 Biota orienta lis (L.\ Endl. Cupressaceae Local names: Truc M. tclc b:!ch M tiro co tllng ¢c (1Mi). English names: Common Chinese arbor-vitae. oriental arbor-vitae. Description: Small evergreen plant. much·branched. with reddish-brown bark. Branches wide-spreading. parallel to the stem. Leaves opposite. nat. scale-like and dark-green. Flowers monoecious. male calkin at the tip of branches. female cone at the base. Fruit ovoid. Flowering period: March -September. Distribution: Naturalized species. extensively cultivated as an ornamental plant Parrs used: Leaves and kernels. The leaves are collected throughout the year. the fruit in autumn. The pericarps are removed and the dried kernels or the oil free them are used. Chemical composition: The leaves and fruits contain an essential oil. consisting of L-borneol. bornyl acetate. a -thujone. camphor and sesquiterpene alcohol. The leaves yield modoxanthin. amentoflavone. quercetin. myricetin. carotene. xanthophyll and ascorbic acid. Therapeutic uses: The leaves and the fruit kernels are well-known for their haemostatic properties. The leaves are utilized for the relief of haematemesis. dysentery. bloody stools. haematuria. haemoptysis. post·partum uterine haemormage. metrorrhagia. epistaxis. fever and cough. The fruit kernels are also effective against insomnia. palpitation. hyperhidrosis and constipation. The plant drug is prescribed daily in a dose of 8 to 12g of dried leaves in the form of a decoction or liquid extract, and 4 to 12g of dried fruit kernels in powder or pilI form. 67 
34 Bischofia javanica Blume Euphorbiaceae Local names: NhQi. qua com nguQi. xfch mQc. pMt English names: Java cedar. vinegar wood. Description: Large tree. up to 15 -20m. in height. Bark nearly smooth. Leaves alternate. trifoliate. long-petioled ; leaflets crenate. glabrous. Flowers unisexual. sexes on separate plants. pale-green in axillary raceme. Berry globose. fleshy. brown; seeds smooth. shining. Flowering period: February -June. DistribUlwn: Grows wild in the mountains; cultivated as a shade-tree. Parts used: The leaves and shoots. collected in April and May. are used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: The leaves contain tannin and vitamin C. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves and the young shoots are effective in the therapy of leucorrhoea. vulvovaginitis due to Trichomonas vaginalis. boils and impetigo. An extract is used as unguent and a d
ecoction is prescribed for external application. The decoction of dried leaves cures diarrhoea. in a dose of 20 to 40g per day. It is also used in gingivitis. toothache. cough and sore throat. 69 
35 Blumea balsamifera (L.) DC. Compositae Local names: bi. tlr bi. cll!i ngai. co (Thai). phil (fay). English name: Ngai camphor. Description : Subshrub 1 Ł 
2m. high. Stems striate· furrowed. much-bT3J)ched at the top. Leaves alternate. bearing some linear segments at the base; margins IOOthed. Inflorescence in terminal corymb of many heads; flowers yellow. Achene hairy. All parts of the plant arc clothed with a velvety tomentum and smell of camphor. Flowering period: March -August. Distribution: Grows wild in the mountains and the midlands. Parts used: The leaves. collected in summer. are air-dried. The fresh leaves are occasionally used. Camphor and borneol are obtained from leaves by distillation. Chemical composition: The essential oil from the leaves contains Lborneol. D-camphor and cineol. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves have antibacterial. antifebrile and anodyne properties. They are prescribed in the treatment of coryza. fever. influenza. cough and dyspepsia. in a daily dose of 6 to 12g in a decoction and also by inhalation of vapour from a boiling decoction of fresh leaves. Poultices of pounded leaves are used to treat haemorrhoids and an alcoholic maceration serves as a liniment for rheumatism. Borneol is administered in a d
ose of 0.10 to 0.20g per day for colic. chest pains Ł . cough. sore tIiroat, and toothache. External application is effective against impetigo. 71 
.--36 Boehmeria nivea (L.) Gaud. Urticaceae Local names: Gai, cay la gai, trfr rna, pan (Jay), co pan (Thai), chiAu c1u (Dao). English names: Ramie grass, China grass, false neule, Chinese silk·plant, Chinese nettle. Description: Tall plant, 1m. or over in height, woody at the base. Young twigs and petioles violet-purple, pubescent Leaves alternate, denticulate, covered with silver-white hairs beneath. Inflorescence in axillary panicle; flowers unisexual, monoecious. Achene with accrescent calyx. Flowering period: November -February. DistribUlion : Cultivated everywhere. Leaves used for making cakes, stem bark for textiles and roots for medicinal purposes. Parts used: Roots. The plants can be taken all the year round, especially in winter. After separating from the plant, the roots are carefully washed, then cut into chips and spread in thin layers for drying in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition : The roots contain the flavonoid rutin. The whole plant yields cyanhydric acid and the seeds provide a fauy oil. TherapeUlic uses: The root possesses antibacterial and diuretic properties. It is prescribed in the therapy of threatened abortion, colic of pregnancy, metroptosis, metritis, haemorrhoids, leucorrhoea, poJlakiuria, chyluria, baematuria, furunculosis and impetigo. The daily dosage is 12 to 20g in the fonn of a decoction, powder or pills. The cure for pregnancy colic takes only 2 to 3 days. The fresh root is pounded and applied externally as a poultice. The decoction is used as a wash. 73 
37 Brucea javanica (L.) Merr. Simarubaceae Local names: Sau dAu rung. xoan rung, nha <1lun lor, tcM sam, fch lXY be (Ba Na). English name: Kosam. Description: Evergreen shrub, aboul 2m. high. Young parts softly pubescent Leaves unequally pinnate, .alternate ; leallets coarsely crenate-toothed, villous on both sides, especially beneath. Inflorescence in tomentose axillary raceme ; flowers small, unisexual, dioecious. Drupe ovoid, black when ripe; seeds compressed, rugose, blackish-brown. Flowering period: March -May. DistribuJion : Grows wild. common on the sea-coast. Parts used: Seeds can be harvested in autumn, when the fruit is ripe. The seeds obtained after eliminating the pulp of the fruit are thoroughly washed and sun-dried or heat-dried. Chemical composition: The fruit yields fatty oil, a glucoside (kosamin) and saponins (brucein A, B, C, G and brusatol). TherapeuJic uses: The seeds arc used as a parasiticide. They are effective for amoebiasis, in a daily dose of 4 to 16g in the form of a decoction or powder, divided into 3 pan doses, for 3 to 7 days. They are active in malaria in a dose of3 to 6g per day, divided into 3 pan doses, after meals. for 4 to 5 days. The oil is exlrncted from the seeds to avoid its vomitive effect. Rectal injection of an aqueous maceration is less toxic. A poultice of pounded seeds relieves haemorrhoids. 75 
38 Caesalpinia sappan L. Legum inosae Local names: To ml)c, dly vang, to phuvng, co vang (ThAi), vang ('Thy). English names: Sappan wood, brazil-wood, bukkwn wood. Description: Small tree, 5-7m. in height, with hard wood, brownish-red. Stems prickly. Young shoots tomentose, branches glabrous; covered with short spines. Leaves alternate, pinnate; leaflets trapezifonn, glabrous above, tomentose beneath. Inflorescence in tenninal raceme; flowers yellow; peduncle clothed with a ferruginous tomentum. Pod compressed, with hard shell and sharp hom. Seeds yellowish-brown. Flowering period: April -June. Distribution: Grows wild in mountains a
nd is c
ultivated in many places as a hedge planL Parts used: Trunk wood. The cutting can be done in autumn and winter. The wood is ftrst cut into short fragments which are chopped into s
lices before drying. Chemical composition: The woody pan contains brasilin and brasilein and an essential oil consisting of D-ex -phellandrene, ocimcne, tannin, gallic acid and saponin. Therapeutic uses: The trunk wood possesses antibacterial, demulcent and haemostatic properties. It is indicated for the treatment of bacillary dysentery, diarrhoea, intestinal and uterine haemorrhages, p
ost-panum haematometra, contusions, wounds, dysmenorrhoea, colic, furunculosis, impetigo,leucorrhoea and panurient's anaemia. It is administered in a d
ose of 6 to l2g per day as a d
ecoction, liquid extract or pills. The concentrated decoction is used externally as a wash. 77 
39 Capsella bursa -pastor is (L.) Medik_ Cruciferae Local names: rt thAi, dlnh ljch, cO !fun gi3c. English names: Shepherd's purse, blind-weed, toy-won, mother's heart. Description: Annual herb, 2O-3Ocm. high. Leaves usually lobed and irregularly IOOthed ; the radical with long petiole, forming a rosette; the upper sessile, amplexiCaul, with diverging auricles at the base. Innoresccnce in terminal raceme; nowers smaU, white. Pod obcordate, compressed, self-dehiscent. Seeds numerous, reddish-brown. Flowering period: March -August. Dislribution : Grows wild on river banks and waste ground. Paris used: The whole plant, harvested in summer. The washed plants are dried in the sun. Chemical COmposilion : The whole plant contains the alkaloid: bursine; choline, diosmin; organic acids: thiocyanic, citric, malic, fumaric, tartaric, tannic and bursinic. It also contains vitamin C, inositol, rhamno-glucoside and hyssopin. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant is a haemostatic remedy for haemoptysis, intestinal and uterine bleeding, menorrhagia. pulmonary oedema, fever, oedema and chyluria. It is prescribed in a dose of 6 to 12g per day as a decoction, liquid extract or tincture. The roots and seeds are effective in 'amblyopia and the nowers for chronic dysentery. 79 
I 40 Cassia alala L. Leguminosae Local names: MuOng trau, cay l<le. English names: Ringwonn shrub, winged senna, ringworm senna, candelabra bush, craw-craw plant. Description: Small shrub, about l.5m. high, with horizontal branches. Leaves paripinnate, alternate; leaflers 8 -12 pairs, broadly rounded, oblique at the base. Twigs and petioles usually reddish-brown. Inflorescence in axillary and tenninal erect spike; flowers yellow. Pod long. slightly compressed, with winged margin. Seeds numerous, black. Flowering period: August -November. Distribution: Grows wild in wet places and is also cultivated for irs ornamental foliage and showy flowers. PartS used: Leaves, harvested all the year round but preferably in April and May, before flowering. The leaves can be used fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The leaves contain anthraglucosides, chrysophanic acid and rhein. Therapeutic uses:The leaves and the stem have antiseptic and laxative properties. They are prescribed for constipation, oedema, hepatitis 'and icterus in a tea-like infusion. Dcnnatomycosis, tinea imbricata, ringwonn, scabies and impetigo are treated externally by rubbing with pounded fresh leaves or by applying fresh leaf juice on the diseased partS. The powdered stem and leaves are used as a laxative in a daily dose of 4 to 8g. They are used as a purgative in a decoction in a single dose of 15 to 20g. 81 
41 Cassia lora L. Leguminosae Local names: TMo quyel minh, muong ngU, rna, Inyi, muong ll!c, nhA IA mun (ThAi), nM c6c be (Thy), diem (Dao), t'rnng (Ba Na). English names: Siclde senna, siclde pod, coffee weed, tavara. Description: Annual shrubby weed, 30· 9Ocm. in height. Leaves alternate, pinnate, with 3 pairs of obovate leaflets. Inflorescence in axillary raceme, shorter than the leaf ; flowers yellow: 1 -
3. Pod slender, very long, curved. Seeds numerous, dark-brown, shining. Flowering period: April· May. Distribution: Grows wild on roadsides and field margins in the midlands and mountains. Parts used: Seeds of ripe fruit. The mature fruit is usually collected at the end of autumn. The seeds are separated from the dried fruit and roasted before use. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains anthraglucosides that on hydrolysis yield emodin and glucose, chrysophanol and rhein. The seeds yield a fauy oil consisting of oleic,linolic, palmitic and !ignoceric acids and si tosterol. Therapeutic uses: The raw seeds are utilized as a laxative, in a dose of 10 to 15g per day. The torrefied seeds are effective for insomnia, headache, constipation, oliguria. cough, ophthalmia, dacryoliths, amblyopia, ocular congestion and hypertension. The daily dose is 5 to 109 in the form of a decoction, powder or piUs. The alcoholic or vinegar maceration of pounded fresh leaves is used externally to treat eczema and dermatomycosis. 83 
42 Catbarantbus roseus (L.) G. Don Apocynaceae Local names: Dt'ra cll", bOng dt'ra, boa hili (]);ng, tnrI'mg xuan hoa, phjilc p6t !lOng ('Thy). English names : Madagascar periwinkle, red periwinkle, pink periwinkle, rosy-flowered Indian periwinkle. Cape periwinkle. old maid. Description " Graceful perennial herb, 30 -8Ocm. high. Stems pinkish-red, much-branched. Leaves opposite, obovate, glabrous on both sides, dark shining above. Flowers pink or white in the axil of the leaves. Follicle cylindrical, 
narrow, slightly arched-recurved in pairs ; seeds numerous, tiny, blackish-brown. Flowering period,' May -October. Distribution,' Common wild plant in coastal areas and is c
ultivated as an ornamental plant. Parts used,' Leaves, harvested before flowering. They are used fresh or sun-dried. Chemical composition " The leaves contain alkaloids : serpentine, ajmaline, ajmalicine. caLharanthine. catharanthinole. vindolinc. vindolinine, vinealeucoblastine, leurosidine, vincristine. Therapeutic uses: The leaves are useful in treating oliguria. hacmaturia. diabetes mellitus and menstrual disorders, in a daily dose of 4 to 8g as a decoction or liquid extract. The roots and the leaves in the form of a decoction or extract arc active on hypertension. The purified alkaloids extracted from the leaves arc effective in treating leukaemia. and those from the roots are used to induce cerebrovaseular dilatation and for hypertension. 85 
43 Centel1a asiatica (L.) Urban Umbellirerae Local names: Rau rnA, Ii!n thao. ph&: (Thy). English name: Indian pennywon. Description : trailing herb. Stems slender, prostrate, rooting at the joints. Leaves alternate or tufted at each node, orbicular, round or kidney-shaped, obviously crenate. Inflorescence in single umbel, bearing 1-5 small flowers, white or reddish, without stalks. Fruit very small, compressed. Flowering period: April -June. Distribution: Grows wild in wet places. Parts used: The whole plant, collected all the year round. It is used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: 1be whole plant contains essential oil, fatty oil consisting of glycerides of oleic, linolic, linolenic, lignoceric, palmitic and stearic acids; an a1ka1oid: hydrocotyline; a bitler substance: vellarine ; a glucoside : 
asiaticoside that yields asiatic acid and glucose and rhamnose on hydrolysis. It also contains vitamin C. Therapeutic uses : The whole plant possesses antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, antifebrile, diuretic and galactagogic activity. It is used in the thel"llPY of fever, measles, haematemesis, epistaxis, diarrhoea, dysentery, constipation, leucorrhoea, jaundice, dysuria, furunculosis, dysmenorrhoea and varices. The usual daily dose is 30 to 40g of fresh plant in the form of extracted juice or decoction. External apjJlication in the form of poultices is prescribed for contusions, closed fractures, sprains and furunculosis. 87 
r I I I 44 Cerbera manghas L. Apocynaceae Local names: Mtr6p hii qua tir. English names: Odollam tree, pink·eyed cerbcra, dog·banc. Description: Medium·sized tree, nearly 10m. high. Bark thick and scabrous. Leaves alternate, usually crowded at the end of branches, shining glabrous on the upper side. Inflorescence in terminal cyme flowers white with a reddish·pink centre, fragrant. Drupe oval, with two flattened seeds. All parts of the plant contain a milky latex. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Grows wild in coastal areas. Parts used: Seeds of the ripe fruit. The fruit can be harvested when ripe. After the pulp has been removed, the seeds are pressed for oil. Chemical composition : The seeds contain glucosides: cerberin, cerbcroside, . neriifolin and thevetin. Therapeutic uses: The seed oil in plasters applied to the s
kin is effective for scabies and prurigo, and applied to the hair kills head-lice. The glycosides extracted from the seeds are active on heart failure. The trunk bark or the leaves are occasionall y used as a purgati ve, but strict precautions must be taken because of their high toxicity. 89 
4S Chenopodium ambrosioides L. Chenopodiaceae Local names: DAu giun, cO hOi, rnu muOi kinh gi6i clAt. English names: American wormseed, Mexican tea, wormseed goosefoot, Jerusalem tea, Mexican goosefoot, American goosefoot. Description: Annual or perennial herb,O.5·1m. high. Stems and twigs striate, glandular·pubescent. green or purple. Leaves alternate, sinuate-{!entate, glandular·pubescent beneath. Flowers minute, in simple or paniculate axillary leafy spike. Utricle globular, membrnnous, pale·green. Seeds black, shining. All parts of the herb have a disagreeable strong smell. Flowering period: May· July. Distribution: Grows wild on river·banks. Parts used: The whole for the roots, can be harvested all the year round, but prefernbly in May and June. After cutting, the plants must be immediately distilled to obtain the chenopodium essential oil. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains essential oil (leaves 0.3 -0.5%, seeds 1 %) consisting of ascaridol, p-cymene, limonene, pinocarvone, aritason. Therapeutic uses : The essential oil of the entire plant is an anthelminthic for Ascaris and Oxyuris. The dose for adults is 1mlof chenopodium essential oil diluted in 30ml of castor oil or in capsules. The purgative magnesium sulfate is administered later. It is indicated for children over five years of age. The dose, depending on their age, is 10 to 20 drops of chenopodium essential oil. It is highly toxic, so strict precautions are necessary. 91 
r 46 Chrysantbemum indicum L. Composi!a. Local names: Clic hoa vang, kim clic, dA clic, kh6 y, bio6c kim (TIIy). English name: Indian chrysanthemum. Description: Annual or perennial herb, 20 -5Ocm. high. Stems s
ulcate, glabrous. Leaves alternate, deeply lobed and irregularly toothed. Inflorescence is an axillary or tenninal corymb of many heads; flowers yellow. The species Chrysanthemum marifolium Ram. is also used medicinally. Flowering period: November -January. Distribution: Naturalized species grown for flavouring wines, spirits, ete ... and for ornamental and medicinal purposes. Parts used: Aowers. The flowers are picked in October and December. They arc subjected 10 sulfur fumigation for 2-3 hours, then bulked .together and reduced by compression. A black liquid should be extracted from the flower.;. After pressing, the flower.; arc spread in thin layer.; 10 dry in an oven at low temperature. Chemical composition: The flowers yield the glycoside chrysanthemin that yields glucose and cyanidin on hydrolysis, IOgether with stachydrine, an essential oil and vitamin A. The semidried seeds contain 15.8% oil. Therapeutic uses : The nowcrs possess antibacterial and antihypertensive properties. They arc utilized in medication for photopsia, vertigo, fever, headache, ophthalmia, dacryolithiasis, xerophthalmia, amblyopia, hypenension, furunculosis and phlegmon. Their long-tenn use is rejuvenating. The daily dose is 8 to 16g in the fonn of a decoction. They arc also a constituent of composite prescriptions. Washing with the decoction and poUltices of pounded flower.; arc effective in furunculosis and impetigo. 93 
47 Cibotium barometz (L.) J.5m. Dicksoniaceae Local names: tich, cu Ii, Jcim mao, cut MIlg (Tay), co cut pa (Thai), nhili Cit vihng (Dao). English name: Golden moss. Description " Arborescent fern. Rhizome stout and short, clothed with long brownish-yellow silky hairs. Leaves are fronds, tripinnate, over 2m. long, bearing many sori beneath; spores minute, pale-brown. Spore -bearing period,' October -January. Distribution,' Grows wild in wet and shady ravines in mountainous regions. Parts used,' Rhiwmes are harvested at the end of the year. After all the radicles and the yellow hairs covering them have been removed, the rhizomes should be chipped into slices and dried in the sun. Chemical composition,' The rhizomes concain 30% starch. The yellow fuzz yields tannin and pigments. Therapeutic uses,' The rhiwme has anti-inOammatory and anodyne properties. It is utilized in the therapy of rheumatism, osteodynia,lumbago, sciatica, leucorrhoea, polyuria in the aged, dysuria and pollalciuria. The daily dosage is IO to 20g in the form of a decoction or alcoholic maceration. The yeUow hairs of the rhizome are used in a haemoscatic poultice for wounds. 95 
48 Cinnamomum camphora (L.) Presl Lauraceae Local names: Long mo, da hlrO'11g, chlrO'11g nllo, khao chuilng my). English names: Camphor tree, Formosan wood. Description: Evergreen tree about 15m. !aU. Trunk bark lhick and grooved. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, long-petiolate, shining on the upper side, 3-nerved at !he basco Innorescence in axillary paniclc, shorter lhan lhe leaf; nowers small, greenish·yellow. Bcrry globose, black when ripe. Flowering period: May -June. Distribution: Cultivated as a shade-tree and for medicinal purposes. Parts used: Roots and wood oflhe trees whcn lhey reach 10 -12 years of age, from which an essential oil is ob!ained by clistillation. Chemical composition: The stem wood and leaves con!ain an cssential oil consisting of camphor, D-ex-pinene, cincol, tcrpineol, caryophyUin, safrole,limonenc, phellandrene, carvacrol, camphorene and azulene. Therapeutic uses: The camphor from lhe trunk wood possesses cardiac, analcptic, antibacterial, demulccnt and anodyne properties. Injections of camphor oil and sodium camphosulfonate are prescribed in cases of cardiovaseular collapse. The peroral administration of camphor is effective for fever, colic, sorc lhroat and impotencc. It is applied externally as an antiseptic, demulcent and anodyne for impetigo, boils, neuralgia and rheumatism, in thc form of a 
tincture, an aqueous solution or an ointment. 97 
49 Cinnamomum cassia Blume Lauraceae Local names: Que. que clem. may que (Thy). English names: Chinese cinnamon. Chinese cassia. cassia bark. Description : Large tree. reaching a height of 10-2Om. All pans glabrous. Leaves alternate. short-petiole<!, rigidly coriaceous. acute or slightly obtuse at the apex. triplinerved base. shining darlc-green above. pale beneath. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal cymose panicle; flowers white. Drupe ovoid. glabrous. purplish-brown when ripe. Flowering period: April -October. Distribution: Occurs wild in mountainous regions; also cultivated. Parts used: Tree bark. collected during summer and autumn. The bark obtained is dried in the shade. An essential oil can be obtained by distillation. Chemical composition: The whole plant. especially the stem bark and tWig bark. contain an essential oil. cinnarnic aldehyde. coumarin. Therapeutic uses: The bark possesses antibacterial. circulatory. respiratory. uterotonic and stomachic properties. It is applied in the therapy of dyspepsia. colic. diarrhoea. cholera. dysentery. menstrual haematomelra, coryza. influenza. cough. asthma. paresis 
and snake-bite. It is administered in a daily dose of I to 4g. in the form of a decoction. infusion. powder. 
piUs or juice obtained by grinding it up with water. It is also recommended as a tonic. The essential oil from the bark is a constituent of balsams. 99 
t I I 50 Citrus grandis (L.) Osbeek Rubeeae Local names: Bum, bOng, mAc (Thy), pQc <tiling (Dao), pIai pllnh (K'bo). English names: Pomelo, shaddock, paradise apple, forbidden fruit, pompeI moose. Description: A tree about 10m. high. Young shoots thorny. Leaves alternate, dark-green, shining above, obscurely puberuIent beneath ; petiole broadly winged. Inflorescence in axinary cyme ; flowers white, fragrant Fruit large, globose, pale-yenow ; rind thick; vesicles numerous, distinct Seeds angular. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Widely cultivated everywhere as a domestic fruit Parts used : Leaves, skin of fruit, flowers. The leaves are harvested throughout the year and used fresh. The ripe fruit is conected from July to September. Its sIcin is separated from the vesicles and dried in the shade. Che"ucai composition: The essential oil from the leaves consists of dipentene, linalol, citra!, Iimoncne, flavonoids, vitamins A,C,BI, rhamnose, citric acid, pectin and fany oil. Therapeutic uses: The fresh leaves in combination with leaves from some other aromatic plants are used in treating coryza, influenza and headache by inhalation of the vapour from the boiling decoction. The fruit rind is effective for dyspepsia, colic and cOugh, in a daily dose of 4 to 12g in the form of a decoction. The seed envelopes contain pectin, which is a haemostatic. The seeds, stripped of their envelope and charred, are applied extemaUy for impetigo. Massage with heated young leaves is effective for treating bruises. 101 
51 Citrus japonica Thonb. Rutaeeae Local names : Quat, kim qual English names: Kumquat, cherry orange. Description: Shrubby plant, I-3m. high, much·branched. Leaves alternate, short -petioled, oval or obovate,rounded at the apex, glabrous, with shining upper surface. Flowers white, axillary or terminal. Fruit globose, orange -red when ripe, with a leathery rind. Flowering period: December -March. DistribuJion: Species cultivated as an ornamental plant during Tet, a traditional Vietnamese festival. Parts used: Fresh fruit, collected at the beginning of spring. The thoroughly washed fruit is used after being steamed with sugar-candy. Chemical composition: The leaves and fruit contain an essential oil. The juice of the fruit contains sugars and organic acids. Tlerapeutic uses: The fresh fruit has an antitussive and expectorant action. It is also effective in sore throat. The dose is 8 to 12g of fruit mixed with sugar -candy or honey and steamed, or in the form of dry candied fruit or syrup, 2 to 3 times a day. It is very good for infants. 103 
S2 o Citrus limonia Osbeck Rutaceae Local names: Chanh, rna (Thai), mac vo (Tay), cM' hcr diu (H'mong), piAu sui (Dao). English names: Canton lemon, ninmeng, Japanese citron. Description: Evergreen shrub, armed with long, sharp, axillary thorns. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, glabrous, dark green above, obscurely crenate -serrate. Rowers white, solitary or in few -flowered raceme. Fruit globose, rind smooth and thin, yellow when ripe. Flowering period: March -
May. DistribUlion: Cultivated everywhere as a spice and medicinal plant Parts used: Leaves, fruiL 1be leaves are collected all the year round and are used fresh. The fruit is picked in autumn. After being washed Carefully it is used fresh or salted (pickled for 2 -3 
months). Chemical composition: The leaves contain essential oil 0.3 -0.5%, strachydrine. 1be skin of the fruit yields an essential oil consisting of limonene, ex -pinene, phellandrene, camphene, citra! and pectin. The juice of the fruit contains citric acid 5 -
10%, calcium and potassium citrate 1 -2%, vitamins C, Bt, riboflavin. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves, the roots and the fruit rinds possess antibacterial and demulcent properties. The boiling decoction of fresh leaves is indicated for inhalation against coryza and influenza The leaves, the roolS and the fruit rinds are used to treat cough, sore throat, dyspnoea, headache, ophthalmalgia, m1Stitis, galactophoritis, anorexia, vomiting and snake-bite. The daily dose is 6 to 12g, administered perlingually or in the form of a decoction. 105 
53 Citrus reticulata Blanco Rutaceae Local names: Quft. quftt th..,,:. cam chia English names : Tangerine. Maltese orange. loose -skinned orange. satsuma Description: Medium -sized 5 -8m. high. naked or with short spines. Leaves alternate with rounded or acute coriaceous ape'. entire. glabrous; petiole obscurely winged. Flowers white in .. i11ary raceme. Berry globose or subglobose. deep -orange when fully ripe; pulp juicy. sweet. Other species and varieties are also used mediCinally. Flowering period: July -December. DistribuJion: Cultivated everywhere. Parts used: Green fruit, the rind of ripe fruit and seeds. The green fruit is collected in July and August. It is cut transversally into two parts and dried in the sun or in dryers. The rind and seeds of ripe fruit are collected and dried (at low temperature for rind). Chemical composition: The leaves and the skins of the fruit yield an essential oil consisting of D-limonene. DL-limonene. linalool. cilr3l. nonylic and decylic aldehyde. methyl anthranilate. The juice of the fruit contains sugars, citric acid. vitamin C and carotene. TherapeuJic uses: The dried rind of the fruit is effective in lreating cough. chest pain. excessive expectoration. dyspepsia. colic. diarrhoea. erucIations and vomiting. It is also an antirheumatic and 
diuretic drug. The usual dose is 4 to 12g per day in the fonn of a decoction. E'temal application of a poultice made of heated fresh leaves and a decoction of dried leaves taken by mouth in a dose of 6to 12g daily. are prescribed for the lreatment of colic and mastitis. 107 
54 Clerodendrum rragrans (Vent.) WilJd. Verbenaceae Local names: Mo mllm xOi, mo !clog, bful !clog, ngQC nil" thO"TTl, pu6ng pi (Thy), bung sin mfa (Dao). English name: Chinese glory tree. Description : Small shrub, 0.5·1.5m. high. Young twigs quadrangular, pubescent Leaves opposite, long·petioled, cordate or flat at the base, tomentose on both sides; margins toothed or wavy. Inflorescence in terminal head of dense, white f1owelli. Berry globose, calyx pelliistent Other species : C
. squama1um Yahl, C.viscosum Yent and C. panicuialum L. are also used medicinally. Flowering period: May -August. DislribUlion : Grows wild; common in many places. PariS used: Roots harvested in July and August The root is removed from the thoroughly washe<l,then dried in the sun or in dryers. TherapeUlic uses: The roots have antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activity. They are utilized in IrCating metritis, metrorrhoea, menstrual disorders, furunculosis, impetigo, osteodynia, lumbago, hypertension and icterus. The daily dose is 12 to 16g, in the form ofa decoction and pills. The decoction serves also as an external antiseptic for the washing of infected wounds, bums and impetigo. 109 
55 Clerodendrum squamatum Vahl Verbenaceae Local names: Xfch dOng nam, mb hoa do, I"" cai, co pung pinh (1Mi). Description: Small shrub about 1m. high. Stems and branches glabrous, quadrangular. Leaves opposite, long-petiole(\, round cordate, entire or slightly den late. Inflorescence in terminal cymose panicle ; flowers tinged red, slamens and style.very long, exserted. Berry globose. The species C. viscosum Vent., with white flowers, is also used medicinally. Flowering period: May -August. DistriouJion: Widely grown everywhere. P(JTts used: Leaves and roolS, harvested all the year round, usually at the beginning of the flowering period. The leaves are thoroughly washed, then lightly dried in dryers. The roolS are washed, cut into slices and dried in the sun or in ovens. TherapeuJic uses: The entire plant has antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties. It is indicated in the treatment ofleucorrhoea, metritis, menstrual disorders, jaundice, furunculosis, impetigo, arthralgia, osteodynia, lumbago and hypenension. It is administered in a daily dose of 15 to 20g in the form of a decoction, extract or pills. A poultice of pounded fresh leaves and washing with their juice help to heal wounds, burns, boils and impetigo. III 
I I I I S6 Codonopsis javanica (Blume) Hook.r. Campanulaceae Local names : Bimg sam, cly c1ili ga. mAn ray cAy (ny), co nlui doi (1'h3i), cang hO (H'mOng). Descriprion : Slender perennial twining herb with tuberous roots and milky juice. Leaves opposite, cordate ; margins entire or denticulate. Flowers campanuiate, ivory·yellow, violet·veined inside, solitary at the leaf-axil. Berry globose, violet; seeds numerous. Flowering period: October· May. DistribUlion: Grows wild on meadows and waste lands or at forest edges in mountainous areas. Parts used: Roots. The best time for harvesting is in autumn. Separated from the stem, the roots are washed clean, then dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The roots contain sugars, fatty subscances, essential oil,. the glucoside seutellarin and a small amount of alkaloids. TherapeUlic uses: The root is a stomachic, expectorant and diuretic. It is recommended in treating general debility, anaemia, fatigue, cough, jaundice, dyspepsia, diarrhoea, nephritis, albuminuria, oedema, haemorrhoids, metroptosis, metrorrhagia and lymphatic system diseases. It is administered in a daily dose of 15 to 30g in the form of an infusion, decoction, pills, powder or elixir. 113 
I l 57 Coix Iachryma-jobi L. Gramineae Local : Y dI, bo bo, hl!t ctrcJm, pAt (TIIy), CO dtrC1i (Thai). English name: Job's tears. Description: Shrubby herbaceous I-2m. tall. Stems glabrous, hollow. Leaves alternate, strap-shaped, base surrounding the stem; margins wavy. Inflorescence in erect axillary spikelet; flowers unisexual, the two sexes on the same plant. Fruit oval, shining, smooth, greyish, with a thick and hard pericarp. Flowering period: May -December. DistribUlion: Grows wild but is also cultivated in many parts for ilS edible fruit Paris used: Grains of ripe collected in winter. Aftcr drying, the fruit is pounded in a mortar to separate the husk from the grain. The husks are discarded and the grains roasted before usc. Chemical COmposilion: The grains contain carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, amino acids, leucine, lysine, arginine, tyrosine, couol, coixenolid, sitosterol, dimethyl glucoside. TherapeUlic uses: The grains are considcred to be nutritious by virtue of their high protein and fat content. They are used for the treauncnt of enteritis, persistent diarrhoea in children, oedema, urinary lithiasis, rheumatism and acrodynia Doses of 10 to 30g per day in the form of powder or decoction are given. liS 
58 Coleus amboinicus Lour. Labiatae Local names: HUng chanh, rau tlln hi dlIy, rau thcnn lOng, dll'O'I1g tir to. English names: Country borage, Indian borage. Description: Perennial succulent aromatic herb, 20· 5Ocm. high. Lower part of the stem woody. Leaves opposite, thick, succulent, crenate. pale-green on both sides. Inflorescence in elongate and terminal raceme; flowers closely whorled, small and pwple. Fruit of 4 reddish-brown nutlets. All parts of the herb are covered with soft hairs and lemon-scented. Flowering period: March Ł May. DistribUlion: Species cultivated as a culinary herb and medicinal plant. Parts used: Fresh leaves, harvested throughout the y
ear. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains an essential oil consisting of carvacrol. TherapeUlic uses: The fresh leaves possess antibacterial, antifebrile and antitussive properties. They are used in tteating coryza, influenza, hyperthermia, adiaphoretic pyrexia, cough, asthma, haemoptysis, sore laryngitis, hoarseness, haematemesis and epistaxis. They are prescribed in a daily dose of 10 to 16g in the form of a decoction, exttacted juice, inhalation of vapour from a boiling decoction. or perlingual administtation of pounded l
eaves together with a little salt. For infants, the Pounded fresh leaves are mixed with honey and steamed. 117 
S9 Combretum quadrangulare Kun Combretaceae Local names : Tr3m bAu, chllTlg bAu, tim bAu, sang ke, song reo Description : Medium-sized tree, 2 -10m. high.Branchlets short, unleafy, spinifonn. Young shoots angular, margins winged. Leaves opposile, short-petioled, pubescent on bolh sides, densely benealh. Inflorescence in axillary and aenninal spiJce; flowers small, yellow. Fruit 4-winged wilh single seed, rhombiform. Flowering period: Seplember -November. Distribution: Grows wild but is usually cultivated in Ihe plains in the south. Parts used: Seeds. The fruit is harvested in autumn and winter. After drying, it is broken 10 release its seeds. Chemical composition: The leaves and the seeds contain tannin. Therapeutic uses: The seeds are anthelminthic for ascariasis and oxyuriasis. They are IOrrefied and orally administered togelher with ripe banana The daily dose for adults is 10 to 15 seeds (14 to 20g). and for children, depending on Iheir age, 5 10 10 seeds (6 to 12g), for 3 days. The leaves, the slem bark and Ihe stem bark mucilage possess similar therapeutic properties. 119 
L I 60 Coscinium fenestratum (Gaertn.) Colebr. Local names : VMg dfu,g, vang clhg. haMg clhg hi Icing, day mo vMg,loong I'ron, kO' Irong (Ba Na). English names: False calumba, Ceylon calumba root, tunneric tree. Descriprion : Lofty woody climber. Roots and stems yellow inside. Stem-barlc longirudinally fluted, whitish-grey in colour. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, shining above, minutely whitish tomentose boneath ; petiole long, inserted not far from the base of lamina; basal nerves 3 -5. Inflorescence in paniculate raceme, borne in the axil of fallen leaves. Flowers unisexual. Drupe globose. Flowering period: January -May. DistribuJion : Grows wild and is indigenous to South Viet Nam. Parts used: Stems and roots harvested all the year round. Chemical composirion : The stems and tho roots contain the allcaloid berberine 1.5 -3 
%. TherapeuJic uses: Berberine is antibacterial. The stem, the roots and the purified berberine are used in treating diarrhoea, bacillary dysentery, enteritis, jaundice, pyrexia and dyspepsia The daily dose is 10 to 16g of dried stem and root in the fonn of a decoction, powder or pills; or 0.30 to 0.50g of berberine chloride in 0.05g tablets. The dose for children depends on their age. An eye-lotion of 0.5 to 1 % berberine chloride is effective for 9Phthalmia 121 
61 Coslus speciosus (Koenig) Smilb Zingiberaceae Local names: MIa db, cat 10i, (\Qt Ilhg, s<; vbng, eM, n6 tn'mg (fAy), co tr6ng bOn ('I'Mi). English name: Elegant eostus. Description: Erect herbaceous plant, attammg 2m. in height, occasionally branched. Rhizome stout, creeping horizontally. Leaves alternate, lower part surrounding the stem, IOmentose, arranged in a spiral when young. Inflorescence in dense terminal spike; flowers white with yellowish centre; bracts red. Capsule witll numerous black seeds. Flowering period: June -AugusL DistribUlion: Grows wild in wet places in mountainous regions. Parts used: Stems and rhizomes, harvested all the year round. After thorough washing, the plants are dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The rhizomes yield steroidal saponins that give diosgenin and tigogenin on hydrolysis. TherapeUlic uses: The rhizome possesses anti-inflammatory activity. It is indicated in the treabnent of fever, urodynia, biliuria, rheumatism, lumbago and neuralgia It is administered in a daily dose of 10 to 20g in the form ofa decoction or liquid extracL Thejuice of pounded fresh tops of young branches is instilled in the ear for otitis. The plant can be used as raw material for diosgenin extraction. 123 
I f 62 Crinum asiaticum L. AmarylJidaceae Local names: NAng hoa Icing, 1A nAng, chu6i mroc, toi voi, cap ('Thy), co 1l)C qu1)n (ThAi). English name : Asian poison bulb. Description: SlOut perennial herb. RootslOCk bulbous. Leaves linear, fleshy, about 1m. long; margins entire and undulate. Inflorescence in terminal umbel with 2 spathaceous bracts; sl3lk solid, slightly compressed; flowers large, white, fragrant Stamens often reddish. Fruit subglobose. Flowering perilld: June -August DislribUJilln : Grows wild in many places and is also cultivated fot its showy flowers. ParIS used: Fresh leaves and bulbs, collected at the end of the year. Chemical Composililln : The bulbs contain alkaloids consisting principally oflycorine and crinamine. TherapeUJic uses: Poultices prepared with heated pounded fresh leaves are used to treat contusions, phlegmon, sprains, luxations and closed fractures. Poultices made of heated pounded fresh bulbs relieve rheumatism and osteodynia A decoction of dried leaves is used as a wash for healing external haemorrhoids. Juice from the fresh bulbs,laken several times per mouth, induces vomiting. It is also instilled in the ear to treat otitis. 125 
c 63 Croton tiglium L. Euphorbiaceae Local names: Ba ba tAu. (TlIy), mhn &, PVt tau (Dao). English names : Purging croton, purgative croton, true croton, croton·oil plant Description: Medium-sized Iree, 3-6m. in height Leaves alternate, toothed, glabrous, pinkish-violet when young. Inflorescence in tenninal raceme; flowers unisexual, monoecious; female flowers without petals. Capsule ovoid, obtusely 3-lobed, yellow. Seeds small with hard brownish-yellow shell. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlion: Grows wild in hills and damp foresrs. Parts used: The seeds are harvested in August and September, when the fruit is ripe but its pericarp has still not opened. After drying, the fruit is threshed to release the seeds. Chemical composition: The seeds yield fatty oil composed principally of stearin, palmitin, glycerides of crotonic and tiglic acids; proteins 18% ; the glucoside crotonoside: amino acids : arginine, lysine ; alkaloids ; the enzyme lipase. TherapeUlic uses: The processed seeds are used in treating flatulence, dyspepsia, constipation, colic, oedema, dyspnoea and persistent cough. A daily dose of 0.01 to 0.05g of pounded and torrefied seeds from which the oil has already been eliminated is given, in the fonn of pills or extract It should be used cautiously because of its high toxicity. Should not be administered to preguant women. Croton tig/ium poisoning is treated with a decoction of Coptis teeta and string beans. 127 
'I 64 Croton tonkinensis Gagnep. Euphorbiaceae Local names: KhO sam, clI den, co d6n (TMi). Description: Small plant, l-l.5m. high. Leaves alternate, sometimes clustered, 2-glandular at Ihe base, covered wilh minute silvery scales on both sides, densely beneath. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal raceme ; flowers white, unisexual, monoccious. Capsule ovoid, 3-10bed seeds brown. Flowering period: May -August DistribUJion : Grows wild and is cultivated everywhere. Parts used: Leaves. The best time for harvesting is in May and June, during the flowering period. The washed leaves arc dried in the sun or in dryers until they go hard. TherapeUJic uses: The torrefied leaves are employed in the treatment of abscesses, boils, impetigo, rhinitis, dysentery, bloody stools, colic, gastric and duodenal ulcers and dyspepsia. A d
ecoction of leaves is administered in a daily dose of 16 to 2Og. Washing with a concentrated decoction is effective against boils and impetigo. 129 
6S Curcuma domestica Valet. Zingiberaceae Local names: vling, nAt kim, khuung holing, co hem, co khan min (ThAi), khinh luung (ny). English names: Common turmeric, long turmeric. Description: Tufty perennial herb about I m
. high. Rhizome thick, much-branched, golden-yellow. Leaves large, entire, long-sheathed, glabrous on both sides. Inflorescence cylindrical, arising from the leaves, on a scape of yellow flowers and greenish or whitish braclS with pink tips. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Extensively cultivated as a spice and medicinal plant Parts used: Rhizomes, harvested in November and December. The rhizomes are separated from the stem, then dried in the sun or in dryers after thorough washing. Chemical composition: The rhizomes contain the pigment curcumin; an essential oil conSisting of sesquiterpenes, zingiberene, D-Cl -phellandrene, tnrmerone, dehydrotnrmerone, 'Y and Cl -alanto iaclOne, curcumene, cineol. Therapeutic uses: The rhizome is well known for ilS anti-gastric-ulcer, anti-inflammatory and cholagogic properties. It is prescribed in the therapy of gastric and duodenal ulcers, hepatitis, jaundice, menstrual disorders, post-partum or menstrual haematometra, contusions, rheumatism, pain in the extremities, boils and impetigo. The daily dose is 410 12g, in the form of powder or extract. It is also used as a poultice for wounds 10 avoid their cicatrization. 131 
I I 66 Curcuma zedoaria (Berg.) Rose. Zingiberaceae Local names: Nga ngh¢ den, ngh¢ tim, bbng tru.!!t, dam (Thy), sung meng (Dao), m'gang m'lung (Ba Na). English names: Round zedoary, long zedoary, Cochin turmeric. Description: Beautiful perennial herb, 0.5-0.8m. high. Rhizome conical, bearing several small tuber.; with long stalks. Leaves entire, largely sheathed, with purple veins along the main nerve on the upper face. Inflorescence cylindrical, arising from the rhizome before the leaves; flowers yellow; bracts greenish, pink at the tips. Flowering period: April-May. DistribUlion : Grows wild in damp deciduous forests; is also cultivated for ornament. Parts used: Rhizomes, which can be harvested in November and December, are washed clean, then dried in the sun. Chemical composition: The rhizomes yield an essential oil consisting principally of ex -pinene, D-camphene, cineol, D-camphor, D-borneol, sesquilcrpene alcohol, zingiberene. Therapeutic uses : The rhizome has stomachic and emmenagogic properties. It is active in dyspepsia, colic, vom,ung, cough, menstrual haematometrn and menstrual disorders. It is also used as a restorative. The dosage is 3 to 6g per day in the form of a decoction, powder or pills. 133 
67 Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapr Gramineae Local names: Sa, huung mao, cll'! phit!c (Thy), cMu (Thai), mo-b'lang (K'ho). English names: Lemon grass, ginger grass, cilroneUa grass, sere grass. Description : Perennial, densely tufted, aromatic grass. Stems underground, shon, whitish or pale-violet. Leaves in dense clusters, linear, amplexicaul, rough-margined, glaucous green on both sides. Inflorescence in many-branched panicles without Slalks. All parts of the grass are lemon-flavoured. Flowering period: March -April. DistribUlion : Species cultivated as a culinary herb and for medicinal use. Parts used: The whole plant can be harvested all the year round. The plant is used fresh or dried. An essential oil is extracted from it by distillation. Chem;cal composition: The whole plant conlllins an essential oil consisting of citra!, Iimonene, isopulegol, cilroneUic acid, geranium acid and a -camphorene. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant possesses antiseptic, antifebrile and stomachic properties. It is used in treating coryza, influenza and pyrexia, in a.dose of 10 to 20g of roolS and leaves in a decoction, by peroral administration or inhalation. It is also prescribed against dyspepsia and vomiting and as a carminative, using three to four drops of the essential oil, diluted in water. Used externally to treat eczema. The essential oil is used as an insecticide against mosquitoes and as a deodorant 135 
r I I 68 Cyperus rolundus L. Cyperaceae Local names: Co gAu, Cll g5u, co CU, hU'011g sa th3o, nha khuon mu (1Mi), rung gMy mia (Dao). English names: Nut grass, coco grass. Description : Glabrous perennial grass, 20-30 em. high. Rhizome tuberous, reddish-brown, aromatic. Leaves long, very narrow, sheathed and one-nerved. Innorescence consisting of 4-6 spikes radiating from a slender, triangular stalk, purplish. Fruit angular, greyish. The sea-coast species is usually highly valued. Flowering period: March -July. Distribution: Weed found wild everywhere in Viet Nam. Parts used: Rhiwmes, collected throughout the year but preferably in autumn. AflCr singeing the rhizomes to eliminate all their radicles, they are well washed, then dried in the s
un or in a dryer. Chemical composition: The rhizomes yield an essential oil (0.5-1.2%) consisting of cypcrene, cypcrol, (l -cypcronc, cineol and L-(l -.pinene, together with starch. TherapeUlic uses: The rhizomes g
ive successful results in the treaUOen! of irregular menstruation, dysmenorrhoea, gastralgia, dyspepsia, diarrhoea and vomiting. They can be used for oral administration in the form of a d
ecoction, powder, pills or tincture. The usual dose is 8 to 12g per day, alone or in association with other drugs. 137 
l 69 Datura metel L. Solanaceae Local names: Cll <1i)c dU'Q'C, cll dien, I",!c (Tay), <1ll la, sua rna (H'mong), hia Ida picu (Dao). English names: White datura, white thomapple, downy thorn apple, recurved thomapple. Description : Small herbaceous plant, I -1.5 m. high. Branches pubescent when young, marked with leaf scars. Leaves alternate, unequal at the base, minutely pubescent on both surfaces; margins wavy. Flowers large, white, solilary in the leaf axil. Capsule globose, covered with slender spines. Seeds numerous, blackish -brown. Flowering period: June -December. Distribution: Grows wild on waste land; also cultivated for ornament. Parts used: Leaves and flowers. Leaves are harvested from April to October. Flowers arc collected in autumn. Both flowers and leaves arc dried at low temperature. Chemical composition: The whole plant, especially the leaves and flowers, contain alkaloids : scopolamine, hyoscyamine, atropine and norhyoscyamine, as well as vitamin C. The total alkaloid contcntofthe roots is 0.10 -0
.20%; leaves 0.1 -0.5%; flowers 0.25 -0.60% ; fruits 0.12%. Therapeutic uses : The leaves possess antispasmodic, sedative and anodyne properties. They are used for treating cough, asthma, rheumatism, chilblains, gastric ulcers, haemorrhoids, sea sickness and air sickness. The maximum dose is 0.2g per dose and 0.6g in 24 hours, in the form of powder, extract or tincture. The dried leaves and flowers are cut into small chips and used in antiasthmatic cigarettes. A pOultiCe of the pounded fresh leaves has an anodyne effect. Warning should be given of their high toxicity. 139 
70 Dcndrobium nobile Lind I. Orchidaceae Local names : h¢C, Ihao, hOOng Ihao dng ga, phi k6p, co vang sao (TMi), xe kl'P (Tay). Description: Tufty epiphyte on old brnnches and rockwalls, 3O-5Ocm. high. Stems slightly compressed, sulcate, pale-yellow when dry. Leaves alternate, Ihick, coriaceous, truncate at Ihe apex. Inflorescence in axillary raceme of2 -4 pink flowers. Capsule rhombi form, longitudinally dehiscent when dry; seeds numerous. Some species of Ihe Desmotrichwn genus are also used medicinally in Ihe same way as Dendrobiwn. Flowering period: Ferbruary -April. DistribUlion : Grows wild in Ihe mountains and is cultivated for its ornamental flowers. Parts used: The whole plant. The best time for harvesting is at Ihe end oflhe year. The washed plants are dried in Ihe sun-or in dryers. The dried plants are imbued wilh alcohol and steam-woked before use. Chemical composition : The whole plant contains mucilaginous substances and Ihe alkaloid dendrobine. TherapeUlic uses: The entire plant is applied as a tonic in pulmonary tuberculosis, general debility, flatulence, dyspepsia, reduced salivation, parched and Ihirsty moulh, night sweats, fever and anorexia. It is likewise effective for sexual impotence, amblyopia, arlhralgia, myaslhenia. lumbago and pain in Ihe extremities. It is prescribed in a daily dose of 810 16g in Ihe form of a decoction. powder or pills. 141 
71 Desmodium triangulare (Retz.) Merr. Legumino&1e Local names : Ba cM, d1!C, vru. <lAt, bl)C dAu, moong (Thy), bien ong (Dao). Description: Small tree, 2-3m. high, branched. Leaves alternate; leaflets 3, ovate to lanceolate, the terminal largest, covered with a dense silvery pubescence beneath. Inflorescence in short axillary raceme; flowers white. Pod minutely constricted between the seeds. Seeds reniform. Flowering period: May -August. Distribution: Grows wild in hilly and mountainous regions. Parts used: The leaves, harvested in dry weather during spring and summer. They are separated from the plants, carefully washed, then lightly dried in ovens. Chemical composition : The leaves con rain tannin, flavonoids, organic acids and alkaloids. Therapeutic uses: The leaves possess antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties. They are indicated in the treaunent of baciUary dysentery, dysenteric syndrome and diarrhoea. The usual dose is 30 to 50g per day, divided into 2 to 3 pan doses, for 3 to 5 days in the form of a decoction, a liquid extract or pills made from extract Snake-bite is treated with finely pounded fresh leaves, the juice being extracted for oral administration and the residue used for a poultice. 143 
I I g I I I 72 Dichroa febriruga Lour. Saxirragaceae Local names: l1nn'mg san, Ilnn'mg san tIa, 0 ro lOa, sleng slao me (13y). Description: Small shrub, 1 -
2m. high; stems glabrous, greenish or pale -violet. Leaves opposite, oblong, acuminate ; margins toothed. Petiole and main nerve usually violet Inflorescence in axiUary or terminal divaricate cyme ; flowers and berries bluish or lilac. Seeds small, pear-shaped. . Flowering period: May -June. DistribUlion : Grows wild in wet places or on stream banks. Parts used: Roots and leaves, harvested all the year round. After careful washing, the roots are cut into slices, then spread in thin layers for drying in the sun or in dryers. They are impregnated with alcohol, then roasted before use. Chemical composition: The roots contain alkaloids : (1-dichroine, J3 -dichroine, 'Y -dichroine and 4 -kelOdihydroquinazoline. TherapeUlic uses: The roots and the leaves possess antifebrile, expectorant and diuretic properties. They are indicated in the treatment of pyrexia, malaria, intermittent fever, cough and 
oliguria. The raw plant material is vomitive, so the roots and leaves are impregnated with alcohol and torrefied. They are administered at the rate of 6 to 12g per day in a decoction, or in the form of purified total alkaloids, used on their own or in combination with other plant remedies. 145 
Ł I 73 Dioscorea persimilis Prain et Durkill Dioscoreaceae Local names: Cli mai, khoai mlli, scm dU'Q'C, hom scm, man c1in(Thru), mful 1<'rn(K'dong), hla dOi(Dao). English name : Yam. Description: Glabrousclimber. Tuber single orpaircd, stout and slightly flat; the tip round, resembling a gourd, descending deep into the soil. Stems usually bearing axillary bulbils (aerial tubers). Leaves alternate or opposite, broadly ovate-cordate. Inflorescence in axillary raceme ; flowers small, yellow. Fruit 3-winged. Flowering period: May -July. DislribuJion : Grows wild and is cultivated for its edible tubers. Parts used: Rhizomes, collected in summer and in autumn, when the plant begins to wither. The carefully washed rhizomes are soaked in an aqueous solution of alum for 2-3 hours, then subjected to sulfur fumigation for 48 hours. They are then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The rhizome contains hydrocarbons 63.25% ; proteins 6.75% ; lipids 0.45%; mucilaginous subslallces 2 -2.8% ; saponins : dioscin, sapotoxin, a1lantoin and dioscorin ; and amino·acids. Therapeutic uses: The rhizomes constitute a restorative and antifebrile remedy. They bave a beneficial effect in dyspepsia, general debility, chronic enteritis, chronic diarrhoea and dysentery, spermatorrhoea, night sweats, diabetes mellitus, polyuria, merrorrhoea, lumbago, vertigo and photopsia. The usual dose is 10 to 25g per day in decoction or powder form. Used externally for poUlticing boils . 147 
74 Dioscorea zingiberensis C.H.Wright Dioscoreaceae Local names : MAi gimg. cO' IQh (Ba Na). . Descriprion: Glabrous rigid climber. 5-10 m. long. Rhizome creeping horizontally with rough darlc:-brown skin. Rootlets rigid. Leaves alternate. base sagittate ; apex apiculate. Petiole long. armed with prickles towards the base. Innorescence in long axillary spike; nowers small. purplish. Fruit 3-winged. Flowering period: February -May. Distribution: Grows wild on the lower slopes of mountains. indigenous in south Viet Narn. Parts used: The rhimme. collected in autumn. when the plant begins to wither. is well washed and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The rhizome contains diosgenin 2-2.5%. Therapeutic uses: Diosgenin is one of the principal materials for the synthesis of steroid drugs such as sex hormones. anti-innammatory corticosteroids. contraceptive drugs and anabolic steroids. 149 
75 Dipsacus japonicus Miq. Dipsaceae Local names: T\JC d09n, san can tMi, oa thai, & c1ftu vu (H'mang). Description : Annual herbaceous 
plant ; 60 -90 cm. high. Roots tuberous, solitary, JO -15cm. long. Stems obscurely angular and sparsely spinous. Leaves opposite, margins toothed, the lower deeply lobed, the upper entire. Inflorescence in dense, long-stalked, cylindrical head, surrounded by an involucre of strong and 
wiry bracts; flowers white. Achene 4-angled, glabrous. Flowering period: August· November. Distribution: Common weed of savannas at an altitude of 1000 m. and above. Parts used: The roots, harvested in autumn, are well washed and dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The roots contain alkaloids, tannins and sugars. Therapeutic uses: The roots possess tonic, anodyne and demulcent properties. They are efTective in the treatment of lumbago, rheumatism, osteodynia, chilblains, spermatorrhoea, metrorThoea, colic in pregnancy, hepatic and renal hypofunction, ascites, trauma, sprains, closed fractures and furunculosis. They are also galactagogic and haemostatic. The usual dose is 10 to 20g per day in the form of a decoction, alcoholic 
maceration, powder or pills. 151 
76 Disporopsis aspera (Hua) Engl. ex Krause Liliaceae Local name: NgQC Inic hOOng tinh Description: Perennial berb, 20 -5Ocm. high, willtering every year in wimer. Rhiwme slender, creeping horiwnlally, pale-yellow. Leaves alternate, subsessile, coriaceous, dark-green above, pale beneallt. Inflorescence in axillary bi-flowered raceme; flowers white, campanulate. Berry globose, dark-violet when ripe. Flowering period: May -June. DismbUJion : Grows wild in damp places in !he highlands. Parts used: The rhizome, harvested when lite fruit fonns (August and September), is well washed and carefully dried in lite sun or in ovens. TherapeUJic uses: The rhizome is tonic and is used in general debility, persistent fever, hyperhidrosis, night sweats, polyuria, spennatorrhoea, dry cough and thirSL The daily dose is 6 to 12g in lite fonn of a decoction, elixir, pills or powder. It is prescribed on its own or in combination willt ollter plants. 153 
77 Disporopsis longifolia Craib Liliaceae Local names: Hoang tinh hoa tclng, hOOng tinh mqc SO Ie, cay Mt, co hAn han (lMi), voong chinh, neng Jai (TAy). Description: Perennial herb,about 1 m
. high. Stems glabrous, erect, spotted with red. Rhizome stout, horizontal with hollow scar resembling a cup. Leaves alternate, ovate. Flowers white, campanulate, axillary. Berry globose, dark-violet when ripe. Flowering period: MarCh'-May. Distribution: Grows wild in wet places in mountainous regions. ParIs used: Rhiwmes harvested in autumn, are separated from the plant, well washed, soaked in molasses, steamed and then dried. These processes must be repeated 9 times before use. Therapeutic uses: The rhizome has tonic and anodyne properties. It is used in general debility, fatigue, anorexia, lumbago, arthralgia and dry throat The dose is 12 to 20g per day, in the form of a decoction, powder or alcoholic maceration. It may be used on its Own or in combination with certain other plants. 155 
78 Dolichos lablab L. Leguminosae Local names : V>In ming, lx!ch bien b\lch bien, thlla ban khao (fAy), ooy IX( (Dao). English names: Egyptian kidney bean, purple hyacinth bean, lablab bean, 1xmavist bean. Description : Perennial twining plant; Siems green or pale purple
, covered with hairs while young. Leaves a1ternale, trifoliale, slightly haiIy. Inflorescence in axillary raceme; flowers while. Pod flat, incurved with remains of persistent style. Seeds reniform, whitish. Flowering period: April· May. -DistribuJion : Cultivated everywhere for ilS edible young pods and medically useful fully ripe seeds. Parts used: Seeds from fully ripe fruit The dry fruit is threshed to release the seeds, which are then well dried and roasted before use. Chemic(jl composition : The seeds contain hydrocarbons, proleins, lipids, amino acids : tryptOphan, arginine, tyrosine, tyrosinase; vitamins A, Bl, B2, C ; 
hydrocyanic acid, and sailS ofCa, P, Fe. TherapeuJic uses: The seeds are considered to be nutritious. They are also antifebrile and depurative. They are effective in cases of sunstroke, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, enteritis, abdominal pains, alcoholism or arsenism. They are used in the form of powder or a decoction in a dose of 8 to 16g per ,day. For sore throat the juice of fresh leaves is administered by mouth. 157 
79 Dracaena cambodiana Pierre ex Gagnep. Liliaceae Local names: Huytt cay x6 nhll, cau rimg, dU-a <4i, giang ong, oi cling (Thy), co oi khang ([Mi). English name: Dragon tree. Description: Small tree, 2 -4m. high. Stems erect, occasionally woody at the base, hollow and brownish-red. Leaves linear with lax shcath and entire margins, crowded in bundles at the end of the branch. Innorescence in terminal compound raceme ; nowers yellowish-green. Berry globose, red when ripe, single-seeded. Flowering period: February -May. DistribUlion : Grows wild, usually in rocky localities. Parts used: Red wood obtained from the foot of the tree, preferably in winter. Nter washing, the wood is well dried in the sun or in dryers. Therapeutic uses: The woody part of the stem is a blood circulation stimulant and demulcent remedy. It is used to treat contusions, blood sLasis, menstrual haemalOmetra, rheumatism, paresis, lumbago and osteodynia. His administered in adoseof81O 12g in the form ofadccoction or elixir. An alcoholic maceration of the mixture with Cinnamomum cassia is used externally as a linimenL 159 
J , 80 Orynaria fortunei (Kze) J.Sm. Polypodiaceae Local names: BO cOt rnng bay, t&: cla, co fling t6 (Thai), <I<'r ro (K'ho), h()c quy&, to phuvng, sang yifulg (Dao). Description : Perennial fern. Rhizome thick, fleshy, coyered with brown cordate scales. Fronds of two kinds : sterile, covering the rhizome and gathering humus, sessile, small and brown when they age, and fertile, which are longer and larger, dark·green, deeply and pinnately lobed, sporiferous beneath. Spore·bearing period: May -August DistribUlion : Grows wild, as an epiphyte on trees and rocks in mountainous regions. Parts used: Rhizome, harvested all the year round. After all the radicles and scales have been removed from them, the rhizomes are cut into fragments, then well dried in the sun or in ovens. TherapeUlic uses: The rhizome possesses antiphlogistic and anodyne properties and has a beneficial effcct in lumbago, arthritis, oslealgia, contusions, sprains, closed fractures, nephrosis, tinniws, parodontosis and gingivitis. The usual dose is 6to 12g per day in the form of a decoction or elixir. It is used externally in poultices applied on areas of inflammation. 161 
, 81 Eclipta alba (L.) Hassk. Compositae Local names: Co ml!C, nhQ n6i, h'!ll lien mao, nha cha e1ll1t (1nai), phong IrlriYng, mo na English names: Dyer's weed, dye-weed. Descriplion : Perennial herb, ereet or prostrate, 30 -40 em. high. Stems green or purple, Ihickened at Ihe nodes. Leaves opposite, subsessile, lanccolate-oblong, denticulate, hirsute on bolh sides. Flowers white in axillary or terminal head; Ihe female radiated, Ihe bisexual in Ihe centre. Achene 3 -angled, slighUy flattened. Flowering period: February -May. Dislribution : Common weed in damp places Ihroughoutlhe country. ParIS used: The whole plant, cc:Iected !he whole year round. The plan IS are used fresh or dried. Chemical COmposilion : The whole plant contains alkaloids: ecliptinc, nicotine; coumarin lactone: wcdclolactonc. Therapeutic uses : The entire plant possesses antibacterial and haemostalic properties. II is recommended in Ihe treaunent of internal and external haemorrhages, metrorrhagia, menorrhagia, epistaxis, haemorrhoids, haemaluria, bloody stools, haemoplysis, haematemesis and hypodermic haemorrhage. II is also used in erylhema, measles, cough, asthma, sore throal, burns, dermatomycosis and thrush of Ihe tongue in infanlS. The daily dose is 12 to 20g of torrefied plant in Ihe form of a decoction or pills, or 30 to 50g of juice from Ihe fresh plant. It is used externally for lime burns, wounds and thrush of !he tongue in infanlS. 163 
r 82 Eleusine indica (L.) Gaertn. Gramineae Local names: CO mAn ulu. thanh 13m thao, ngun can thAo, co nhi! hut ('I"Mi), hang ma (fay), hla xu xan (Dao). English names : Crowfoot grass. dog's tail grass, crabgrass, wire grass. Description: Annual herb ; stems erect or occasionaJI y prostrate in tufts, 30 Ł 6Ocm.high. Leaves loricate, narrow, arranged in two rows; the blade glabrous; sheath hairy. Inflorescence in whorl of 5· 7 digitate spikes. with single spikelet or two spikelets separated below. Fruit oblong, nearly trigonal. Flowering period: May· July DistribUlion : Common weed on pasture and roadsides. Parts used: The whole plant, coUectedaJI the year round. Used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains nitrates. TherapeUlic uses : In Viet Nam traditional medicine, the plant is a component of the "basic remedy". It is considered diuretic, laxative. stomachic. depurative and good for the liver. It is used against influenza, hypenension, oliguria and retention of urine. It is orally administered in the form of a decoction in doses ranging from 60 to lOOg per day. 165 
83 Eleulherine subaphylla Gagnep. Iridaceae Local names : Slim <1l)i hanh. hanh <l<l, toi <10, tOi lao, phong nhan, hom blla IUV1 (Thai). Description: Perennial herb, 30 . 4Ocm.high ; usually withered in the dry season. Bulb purplish. Leaves lanceolate, acute at both ends, with numerous parallel nerves. Inflorescence in long raceme; flowers white. Capsule many-seeded. Flowering period: April-June. DistribUlion : Grows wild but is also cultivated everywhere. ParIs used: The bulbs, harvested when the plants begin to wither, are well washed, cut into thin slices and dried at low temperature. Chemical composition : The bulbs contain quinoid substances, eleutherin, isoeleutherin, eleutherol. TherapeUlic uses : The bulbs are an antibacterial, demulcent and haemostatic remedy. They are used in Ireating .sore throat, pertussis, boils, impetigo, jaundice, 
haemoptysis, uterine haemorrhage, trauma, wounds, abortion, anaemia, headache and photopsia and in insening intta-uterine devices. The daily dose is 4 to 12g in the form of a decoction, infusion, powder or piUs. The external use of an alcoholic maceration and ointment is effective for impetigo and boils. The bulbs are also a constituent of composite sedative recipes. 167 
I 84 Elsholtzia ciliata (fhunb.) Hyland. Labiatae Local names : Kinh gi6"i, khU'O'Tlg gi6"i, gilt til, nM nat hom ('I'Mi). Description: Small annual plant, with soft pubescence; 40·60 cm. high ; stem quadrangular. Leaves opposite, margins scmtte : nerves apparently impressed on the lower side. Innorescence in terminal, unilateral spike; nowers pale-violet or purplish. Achene oblong, glabrous. All parts of the plant are scented. Flowering period: August -October. Distribution: Extensively cultivated as spice and medicinal planL Parts used: Branches, leaves and nower panicles dried in the s
hade before use. The plant is harvested when in flower. Chemical composition : The whole plant contains an essential oil consisting of Elsholtzia ketones. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant is used against influenza, headache, sore throat, 'measles, ostealgia and furunculosis. It is also haemostatic and is used in menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, haemoptysis and bloody stools. The usual dose is 10 to 16g of dried plant in the form of a decoction or infusion, or 30g of the fresh plant in the form of juice. The vapour from the boiling decoction can be inhaled. 169 
I I 85 Eriobotrya japonica (Tbunb.) Lind!. Rosaceae Local names: Ty b3 nh6t lily, SO'lI tra Nh?t Boo, phI pM English names: Loquat. Japanese medlar, Japanese plwn. Description: Medium·sized evergreen tree, 5 . 7 m
. high; branches pubescent when young, then glabrous. Leaves a1remare, oblong, thick and stiff ; velvety pubescent beneath ; margins toothed. Innorcscence in rerminal raceme, covered with a dense silvery pubescence. Drupe oval or pyriform, yellow when ripe ; pulp sweetish, acid and edible; 3
·5 seeds. Flowering period: Seprember· February. DistribUlion : Cultivated for its ornamental foliage and edible fruit. Parts used: Leaves, picked in the months of April and May. Afrer the leaf surface has been carefully wiped to eliminate all the hairs, the leaves are cut into small pieces, then dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The fruit contains sugars: levulose and sucrose; malic, citric, tartaric and succinic acids ; cryptoxanthin. Il . carorene, nco . -carorene. The seeds contain amygdalin and a fatty oil. The leaves yield saponins, ursolic acid, oleanolic acid and earyophyllene. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves possess antitussive and antispasmodic properties. They are prescribed in the treatment of cough, chronic bronchitis, excessive expectoration, fever, coryza, hyperemesis, especially vomiting of pregnancy, epistaxis.and dyspepsia The daily dose is 10 to 20g in a decoction or liquid extract The decoction is also used to wash wounds. 171 
86 Erythrina variegata L. var. orientalis (L.) Merr. Legum inosae Local names: VOng nem, III vOng, hili dOng, thrch d6ng, co to6ng lang (Thai), lxr tOng (Thy). English names: India bean, Indian coral·bean, mochi wood tree, East Indies coral tree. Descrip/ion : Tree reaching about 10 m. in height. Siems branched, smooth, sparsely covered with short prickles. Leaves allemate, trifoliate, the lerminal largest; IcaJlet·staIk glandular. Inflorescence in dense axillary and lerminal raceme; flowers red ,appearing before the leaves. Pod long, black, constriCled between the seeds. Seeds reniform, red or brown. Flowering period: March· May. Dis/ribu/ion : Grows wild in deciduous forests and is cultivaled in gardens for ornament. Parts used: Leaves, used fresh or dried and harvested in spring. Chemical composition : The leaves and Siems contain the alkaloid erythrinaline. The seeds yield the alkaloid hypaphorine and a saponin: migarrhin. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves are reported to be sedative. They are used for the relief ofinsomnia and anxiety. Dried leaves are usually administered in !he form of a decoction or an extract in a dose of 8to 16g per day. They arc often asssocialCd with o!her plants such as Passiflora hispida and Morus alba. Crushed fresh leaves are used eXlemally as a poultice in haemorrhoids and metroptosis. Powdered leaves are topieally applied for wounds and ulcers. The stem bark is used against rheumatism in the form of a decoction, extract or tincture in a dose of 5 to 109 per day. 173 
87 Eucommia ulmoides Oliver Local names: B6 trqng, dang ping (Tay). English name: GUIIa-percha tree. Eucommiaceae Description: Medium-sized tree, 10 m. high or more. Leaves alternate, petiolate, margins toothed. The baric and leaves contain a milky latex which stretches into numerous strands when broken. Flowers unisexual. dioecious ; perianth none in either sex. Fruit rhomboidal, nat, brown, single-seeded. Flowering period: March -May. DistribuJion : An imponed plant, cultivated in mountainous regions. Parts used: The bark, separated from the tree in summer and pressed nat, is left in heaps for6-7 days until the internal surface takes on a blackish tinge. It is then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : The bark yields gutta-percha, resins, the glueosides aucubin and loganin ; lipids, proteins, essential oil and chlorogenic acid. ThuapeuJic uses: The U'Unk bark, which possesses antihypertensive and anti-inflammatory properties, is used to regulale the activity of the sex hormones. It is also used in treating nephrosis, lumbago, arthrodynia, spermatorrhoea, impotence, uterine colic and uterine haemorrhage in pregnancy, hypertension, polyuria, rheumatism, inflammation and oedema. It is given in a daily dose of 20g in the form of a decoction, liquid extract, powder, pills or elixir. 175 
] I 88 Eupatorium staecbadosmum Hance Compositae Local names : Man tlr6i, lan, Ian thilo, co pIlAt phil' (1'Mi). Descriprion : Perennial herbaceous plant, reaching a height of 1m. Young shoots purplish-violet, longitudinally sulcate. Leaves opposite, oblong, acute ; margins denticulate ; strongly scented when crushed. Inflorescence in dense tenninal axillary corymb of many heads ; flowers pale-violet Achene small, black. Flowering period : September -OcIOber. Distributwn : Cultivated as a vegetable and medicinal plant Parts used: The whole plant, harvested in summer before flowering, must be well washed. It may be used fresh or dried in the shade. Chemical compositwn : The plant contains an essential oil. Therapeutic uses : The aerial parts of the plant possess antiseptic, diuretic, stomachic and haemagogic properties. They are used in treating fever, mensuual disorders, dysmenorrhoea, colic following post-partum haematometta, oedema, trauma, vertigo, furunculosis and impetigo. They are prescribed in a daily dose of 10 to 20g of dried plant in a decoction. The fresh plant is used as an insecticide for killing lice, bugs, fleas and moths. 177 
89 Euphorbia tbymifolia L. Eupborbiaceae Local names : Co sfra hi nhO, vU sfra clAt. thi!n can thao, nha nfun mOn, nha nQi (IMi). English name: Thyme·leaved spurge. Description : Small annual herb with milky juice. Stems prostrate, slender, purple and downy. Leaves opposite, oval·shaped, obscurely serrulate, slightly pubescent beneath. Inflorescence in few-flowered axillary cyme. Capsule hairy. Seeds quadrangular, glabrous. Flowering period: May -October. DistribUlion: Grows wild on pasture land. on railway embankments and in gardens. Parts used: TIle whole plant, harvested all the year round but preferably in summer, is washed and used fresh or else dried and roasted before use. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains 5, 7, 4 -trihydroxy flavone 7-glucoside; essential oil. TherapeUlic uses : The entire plant possesses antibacterial and galactagogic properties. It is used in treating bacillary dysentery, boils, hypogalactia, galactophoritis, metrorrhagia and infantile lientery. It is administered in a dose of 20 to 30g per day in the form of a decoction for adults, and in a dose of 10 to 20g for children. A combination in equal parts with Portulaca oleracea is also used for dysentery. A poultice of the pounded leaves is effective against dermatosis and wounds. The plant is also used as an insecticide. 179 
90 Euphoria longan (Lour.) Steud. Sapindaceae Local names: NMn. ctli nO. nWn. mac nhan (Tay). English name: Longan. Description: Medium·sized !ree. 5 -10 m. high. Leaves pinnate. alternate; leaflelS 5 -
9. oblong-Ianceolate. glabrous. Innorescence in terminal panicle; nowers pale-yellow. Fruit globose. skin glabrous or slightly rough, brownish-yellow. Seeds shining black. coaled with a neshy aril. Flowering perwd: April-May. DistribUlwn : Extensively cultivated for ilS edible fruiL Parts used: Pulp and seeds. The fruit can be picked in July and AugusL The pulp is dried in the sun or in ovens. Seeds removed from the pulp are dried before use. Chemical compositwn : The arils contain sugars: glucose. saccharose ; vitamin A and B ; proteins and lipids. The seeds yield saponins. tannin. fatty substances. starch. TherapeUlic uses: The aril is considered to be nU!ritious. It is useful for the treaUDent of neurasthenia, insomnia. amnesia and mental deficiency. It is usally prescribed in the fonn of a decoction or extracL The average dose is 9 to 109 per day. Powdered seed is applied topically against funmculosis and impetigo. 181 
91 Fibraurea recisa Pierre Menispermaceae Local names: Hoang c1fulg, hoang lien nam, day vang giang, khau khem (Tay), co I(IC khem (ThAi), t6t choqc, t'ron (K'dong). Description : Woody Climbing planl Roots and old branches yellow inside. Leaves alternate, apex acute, base round or slightly cordate 
; obviously 3-nerved ; petiole long, swollen at both ends. Flowers unisexual, dioecious, greenish-yellow in raceme of old branches. Fruit oval, yellow when ripe ; single-seeded. Flowering period: May -August. DisrribUJion : Grows wild in mountainous regions. ParIS used: Roots and stems, harvested in autumn, after being well washed are cut into suitable sizes and dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemjcal COmposilion : The roots yield alkaloids : palmatine, jatrorrhizine, columbamine, and berberine. TheropeUJic uses: A decoction of the roots is used to tteat ophthalmia, furunculosis, prurigo, enteritis, gastritis, cystitis, dysentery and fever. The doses given range from 4 to 12g daily. In cases of purulent otitis, the powdered roots associated with alum are applied topically. 183 
I I 92 Ficus pumila L. Moraceae Local names: Trau cfJ. cay x¢p, vay 6c. com lcnh. bi l¢. mqc lien. sung tMn lin, mile pup (Thy). English names : Creeping fig, climbing fig. Descriplion : Qimbing shrub. Stems rooting at the nodes. Leaves alternate, glabrous, of two kinds. one kind shaped like scales and the olher obovate. Inflorescence in the axil of the leaves, bearing male flowers above and female below. Fig solitary. pyriform, glabrous, brownish-violet when ripe. Flowering period: May -October. Discribwion : Grows wild on rocks and tree trunks and is cultivated for covering walls. ParIs used: Fruit and leafy branches. The leafy branches can be harvested all the year round. The fruit is picked in autumn. Chemical Composilion : The gum oblained from the plant yields glucose, fructose and arabinose on hydrolysis. The fruit conlains proteins and latex. Therapewic uses: The aerial parts constitute a systemic remedy and blood reconstilUenl. They are used in treating chronic dysentery, haemorrhoids, galactophoritis, spermatorrhoea, impotence, menstrual disorders. dysuria, dyscbezia, rheumatism, lumbago. osteodynia, boils and impetigo. The daily dose is 8 to 16g of climbing stems and leaves. in the form of a decoction, extract or alcoholic maceration or 3 -
6g fruit, in the form of a decoction, extract or candied fruit 185 
93 Gardenia jasminoides Ellis Rubiaceae Local names: Danh dlInh, chi t.r, thuy hoang chi, mac lang cuung (T1Iy). English name: Cape jasmine. Description: Small evergreen tree, I -2 
m. high. Leaves opposite or in whorl of 3, shining, glabrous on the upper side; slipule large, amplexicaul. Flowers yellowish-white, fragrant, solitary at the end of brahchlets. Fruit ovoid, angular, tipped with remains of calyx, pulp yellowish-orange. Seeds numerous. The spocies Gardenia stenophyllus Merr. is also used medicinally. Flowering perwd: March -May. Distributwn : Grows wild in wet places and is cultivated for ornament Parts used: Leaves and fruit The leaves can be harvested all the year round. After being well washed, they are dried in the sun or in dryers. The ripe fruit is picked from August to November. ChenUcal compositwn : The leaves and fruit contain glucosides (gardenoside, gentiobioside, geniposide, crocin, garden in) ; tannin ; essential oil ; pectin; Jl -sitosterol; D -mannitol; nonacosane. Therapeutic uses: The leaves and fruit possess antibacterial, antifebrile, demulcent cholagogic and diuretic properties. They are used in treating fever, jaundice, epistaxis, sore throat haemoptysis, bloody stools, dysuria, bums, boils and impetigo. The daily dose is 6 to 12g of fruit in decoction, used on its own or in combination with Adenosma glutinosum. A poultice of pounded fresh leaves is effective for wounds, phlegmon and acute conjunctivitis. 187 
94 Gomphandra Gagnep. lcacinaceae Local names: Be, beo, boi beo. beo !clog. tiet hiing. 16 n¢i. Description : Small erect tree, 2 -
4 m
. high ; young shoots siJlcy pubescenL Tuberous roots fleshy. Leaves alternate. lance-shaped, margins entire, soft and velvety beneath. Inflorescence in compound corymb, opposite to the leaf; flowers small, white. Fruit rhomboidal, pubescent, with remains of calyx. Flowering period: May -September. Distribution: Grows wild in mountainous regions. Parts used: The roots, collected the whole year round, but preferably in autumn, after being well washed are cut into slices. soaked in rice wash for 24 hours, then dried in the sun or in dryers. Therapeutic uses: The root is used as a reconstituent and stomachic, as a stimulant to the appetite and as a galactagogic, laxative and diuretic remedy. Its continuous administration brings about a weight increase and good heallh .. A daily dose of 10 to 20g is given in the form of a decoction, elixir or powder or mixed with honey pills. 189 
9S Hedyotis capitellata Wall. ex G.Don var. mollis Pierre ex Pitard Rubiaceae Local names : cAm, loet mOm, <161 hl'61, ng6n cUi, ng6n IQ11, khAu dIn (TIly), san cOng mfa (Dao). Description: Twining suffrutescent climber. Siems cylindrical, swollen at the nodes. Leaves opposite, dark·green above, pale below; stipule ciliate. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal paniculate cyme ; flowers white or yellowish· white. Capsule small, many·seeded, crowned by segments of the persistent calyx. All parIS of the plant are densely IOmenlOse. Flowering period: May· July. Distribution: Grows wild in the hills and mountains. Parts used: The whole plant, harvested the whole year round, but preferably in spring and summer, is washed and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains alkaloids, saponins and tannin. Therapeutic uses: The stem offers an effective remedy for gastralgia, gastric ulcer and heanburn. The usual dose is 20 10 40g per day in the form of a decoction, powder or extract, divided inlD 2 subdoses, during the colic pains or before meals. A mouth·wash prepared with Hedyotis stem liquid extract and honey is used for ulcerous slOmatitis. A poultice made of pounded fresh leaves acts as a vulnerary, promoting tissue regeneration in wounds. 191 
l 96 Hemerocallis rulva L. Liliaceae Local names: Hoa hien, huyon thilo, kim cMm, hoang hoa tMi, phk cMm rau huyen. English names: Yellow day·lily, orange day·lily, tawny day·lily. Description: Perennial herbaceous plant with tuberous roots. Leaves linear, arranged in two rows. flowers funnel·shaped, orange· yellow , 6· 10 on a forked scape. Fruit triangular. Seeds shining black. Flowering period: May· September. DistribUlion: Cultivated for ornament and medicinal use. Parts used: Tubers, leaves and flowers. The leaves and tubers are harvested all the year round, the leaves being used fresh, the tubers dried. The flowers are picked at the beginning of the flowering period and dried at low temperature. Chemical composition: The flowers yield proteins, fatty substances, sugars, vitamin A and C ; amino acids: adenine, choline, arginine and iodine. Therapeutic uses : The roots, the leaves and the flowers possess anti·inflammatory and hcamostatic propenies. They are used in treating fever, colitis, dysentery, oedema, dysuria, urinary lithiasis, heamorrhage, haemoptysis, epistaxis, mastitis and rheumatism. The daily dose is 6to 12g of roots or 30 ID 50g of flowers, in the form of a decoction or juice from the fresh plant. The external application of pounded fresh roots and leaves in a poultice is effective against innammalion. 193 
97 Heterosmilax erythraotha Baill. Liliaceae Local names: Khue khik, day kim cang, ell cun, kim cang mO", day oau. Description: Glabrous climber, unarmed. Leaves alternate, ovate, base subeordate ; petiole long, with tendrils. Inflorescence in long-slalked axillary umbel; flowers pink or spoUed with red, the male and female on different plants. Fruit globose, 8 -
10 mm. in diameter. black when ripe. Seeds 2 . 
4, ovate. Flowering period: May -October. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the mounlains and the midlands. Parts used: The tubers, collected in summer, arc well washed. cut into slices and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The tuberous roots contain saponins, tannin and resins. TherapeUlic uses: The tuberous roots possess anti·inflammatory and antiallergic properties and are used in treating rheumatism, arthralgia, osteodynia, lumbago, boils, impetigo and prurigo. The daily dose is 15 lO 30g in the form of decoction, aqueous extract, powder or pills. 195 
98 Hibiscus mutabilis L. Malvaceae Local names: Ph" dung, mQc lien, mQc phU dung, bo6c dao (Tay). English names : Chinese rose, changeable rose, rose-mallow, cotton-rose. Description: Plant growing several metres high; young twig tomentose. Leaves alternate, long-petioled, palmatilobed, hairy on the lower side, margins toothed. Rowers large, simple or compound, solitary in the axil of the leaves, first white then pink. Capsule globose, covered with hairs. Seeds ovate and si1Jcy-viIlous. Flowering period: September -November. Distribution: Cultivated everywhere for ornamenl Parts used : Leaves and flowers, both used fresh. Leaves ean be harvested all the year round. The flowers are picked during the flowering period. Chemical composition: The flowers contain anthocyanosides. Therapeutic uses: The leaves and the flowers possess antibacterial, demulcent and diuretic properties. They are used in treating boils, panicularly on the chin, in the fonn of poultice made o
f powdered dried leaves and flowers mixed with concentrated tea infusion, which makes the boils burst earlier and less painfully. Also used in treating impetigo, prurigo, metritis, leucorrhoea, mastitis, nephritis, cytitis, dysuria and infections, usually in a dose of 5 
to 20g per day, in the fonn of a decoction. 197 
99 Hibiscus sagittifolius Kurz var. Malvaceae quinquelobus Gagnep. Local names: Srun 1>6 cMnh, th6 hao sam, nhAn sam Phti Yen. Description : Herbaceous plant about 50 cm. high. Tuberous roots fleshy. Leaves alternate, long·petioled, serrate, polymorphous, the lower entire, the upper palmately 5·lobcd. Flowers large, red, solitary in the leaf·axils. Capsule ovate·acuminate, loculicidally 5-valved when ripe. Seeds numerous, brown. All parts of the plant arc hirsute. Flowering perwd: May· September. DistribuJion: Grows wild in mountainous regions and is c
ultivated for medicinal use. Parts used: The roots, collected in autumn and winter, arc soaked in rice wash for 12 hours, then steamed and dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition : The roots yield starch and mucilaginous substances. TherapeUlic uses: The roots, which possess rcconstilUCnL, antitussive and emmenagogic properties, are used in treating general debility, insomnia, pulmonary tuberculosis, anorexia, infantile stomatitis, rachitis, persistent fever and cough, sore throat, bronchitis, menstrual disorders, lumbago, body pains, photopsia, venigo and leucorrhoea. The d
aily dose is 10 to 20g in the form of a decoction, powder or elixir. 199 
I t r 100 Holarrhena antidysenterica Apocynaceae (Roxb. ex Flem.) A.DC. Local names: MIh: hoa tclng, mQc hoa tclng, thUng 1>1 to, sUng U3U, mQc vru (Tay), xi ch1lo (K'ho), h6 lien. English names: Concssi bark, kurchi bark, bitter oleander, dysentery rose-bay, Tellicherry bark. Description : A uee reaching about 10m. in height or more. Bark pale-brown, lenticellate. Young twigs tomentose. Leaves opposite, oval, subsessile. Rowers white in axiUary or terminal corymbiferous cyme. Follicles cylindrical in pairs, long, narrow, incurved. Seeds numerous, brownish, crowned with a tuft ofiong hairs at one end. All parts of the plant yield a milky juice. Flowering period: April-May. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the mountains and the midlands. Parts used: The bark, collected in February and March. Removed from the stem, the bark is well washed, then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The trunk bark contains alkaloids: conessine, conesslmme, isoconesslmlne, kurchinc, conimine, conamine, conkurchine, hoIarrhine, holarrhenine and hoIarrhimine ; gum, resins, lannin, triterpene alcohol, lupeol, -sitosterol. TherapeUlic uses: The trunk bark possesses amoebicidal propcnies. It is effective against amoebiasis in a daily dose of 8 to 109 of dried trunk bark, or 4 to 6g of dried seeds in the form of powder, tincture or liquid exUaCL The sum of the alkaloids and conessine are also used. A bath containing a decoction of bark or leaves cures scabies. An alcoholic maceration of pounded roots is also used topically against scabies. 201 
101 Homalonema occulta (Lour.) Schott Araccae Local names: Thien nion son thuc, nly hlIU11g, bao' kim, vCo, hlIU11g tnlo yeng (K'ho), duyen (Ba Na), hla hau ton (Dao). Description: Perennial herb. Rhizome long, tubular, with hard fibres. Leaves large, sagiuate-cordate with tightly clasping sheath. Inflorescence in axillary spadix: the male flowers above. the female below; perianth absent in both sexes. Berry red when ripe. All parts of the especially the rhizome, are aromatic. Flowering period: April -June. Distribution: Grows wild along stream banks and on the s
ides of rocky ravines in mountainous regions. Parts used: The root-stocks, collected in autumn and winter, arc well washed and then dried in the sun or in ovens. The fresh leaves arc also used. Chemical ComposlIwn : The rhizome contains an essential oil consisting of linalol, a-terpineol, linalyl acetate, sabinene, limonene, propionic aldehyde and acetic acid. Therapeutic uses: The rhizome possesses anti-inflammatory, anodyne and stomachic properties. It is used in trcaling rheumatism, anhrnlgia, paresis, gastralgia, dysmenorrhoea, osteodynia of the aged and dyspepsia. It is administered in a dose of 6 to 12g per day in the form of a decoction, elixir or extract Massage with a fresh rhizome ma
ceration has an anodyne effecl. A poulticc of pounded fresh leaves is active on boils. The rhizome is also an insecticide against moth. 203 
102 Houttuynia cordata Thunb. Saururaceae Local names : ca. Ja gi'p. rau gi'p. thai. ngu-tinh thao. cil mua mCa (Dao). co vAy mea (Thai). rau phjac hoay English name: Tsi. Description: Perennial herbaceous plant. 20-4Ocm. high. Stems greenish or reddish·purple. Leaves alternate. hean·shaped with stalk sheathing the stems. emitting a fishy smeU when crushed. Innoreseence in axillary or tenninal spike; nowers small. pale· yellow ; bracts white. Seeds oval. glabrous. Flowering period: May· July. Distribution: Grows wild in rice-fields and on stream banks. Parts used: The whole plant. except for the roots. The plant. which can be harvested all the year round. is used fresh. Chemical composition : The whole plant yields an essential oil G consisting of methyl-nonyl ketone. myrcene. D-limonene. a-pinene. p-cymenc. linalol and geraniol; the alkaloid cordaline ; the navone quercitrin ; lipids ; hexadecanoic and decanoic acids. TherapeuJic uses: The whole plant has a beneficial effect in the treatment of haemorrhoids. acute conjunctivitis and ocular infections due to Bacillus pyocyaneus. It is also used in treating measles. enteritis and irregular menstruation. It is used in the fonn of a decoction in doses of 6 to 12 g of dried or 20 tD 30g of fresh plant The juice of the crushed fresh plant is also administered orally. In cases of contusions and ophthalmia. crushed fresh leaves arc applied externally in a poultice. , 205 
103 Hoveni. dulcis Thunb. Rhamnaceae Local names: Khung Icheng. v(U1 thQ. chi Ice trao. English names: Japanese raisin tree. coral tree. Description: Evergreen tree about 7·lOm. in height. Young twigs lenlicellate and pubescent. Leaves alternate. long·petioled. with 3 nerves from the base ; margins sharply denticulate. Innoreseence in axillary or tenninal cyme; nowers pale-green. Fruitglobose. borne on pinkish-brown swollen peduncles. sweetish and edible. Seeds round. slightly compressed. Flowering period: June -August. Dislribulion : Grows wild and is cultivated in the mountains. Paris used: Fruit and fruit-bearing branches. collected when the fruit is fully ripe. After picking. they arc dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The fruit contains sugars: glucose. fructose and sucrose ; salts : potassium nitrate. potassium malate. TherapeuJic uses: The ripe fruit and the small twigs bearing ripe fruit are a reconstituent and depurative remedy. They arc used for the 8 trcaunent of alcoholic intoxication. 
dysuria. general debility and dry throaL The daily dose is 3 to 5g in an alcoholic maceration. 207 
104 Hydnocarpus anthelmintica Pierre Flacourtiaceae Local names : ChUm bao lan, phong tir, IQ n6i. English names: Sponge -berry, common chaulmoogra tree. Descriprion : Tall tree, 10m. high or more. Baric whitish-grey. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, shining green ; entirely pinkish when young. Flowers unisexual or polygamous, in axillary raceme, both sexes on the same plant Fruit large, globose. Seeds numerous, angular, embedded in the pulp. Flowering period: April-June. DisrribUlion : Grows wild, but is commonly cultivaled for shade and ornament PariS used: Seeds of mature picked when fully ripe. Separaled from the fruil, the seeds are pressed to yield oil. Chemical COmposilion: The seed kernels contain lipids 4(}'55%, a glucoside that yields glucose and hydrocyanic acid on hydrolysis; a fauy oil consisting of glyccrides of chaulmoogric, hydnocarpic and gorlic acids ... TherapeUlic uses: The seed kernels are used in treating leprosy, scabies, impetigo and some other dermatitides. They are applied externally in the form of a medicinal oil or ointment An emulsion of the seed kernel oil is exceptionally administened orally in the form of drops, but caution must be exercised because of its very high toxicity. 209 
l 105 Illicium verum Hook. r. Magnoliaceae Local names: HOi, bat giAc hOi huung, hOi, h1;i sao, mAc cMc, mAc hOi (Tay). English names: True star-anise, Chinese anise. Description : Medium-sized tree, 6 -
10m. high, branches erect, glabrous and brittle. Leaves entire, thick and shining glabrous, usually crowded in bundles at Ille end of the branches. Flowers pink, solitary in the leaf-axil. Fruit of 8 follicles, radiating, compressed; each follicle contains one seed All parts of Ille plant, especially Ille fruit, are strongly aromatic. Flowering period: March -June. Distribution : Cultivated in mountainous regions, especially in 4ng Son province. Parrs used: Ripe fruit, picked in autumn, is lightly dried, then distilled to obtain an essential oil. Chemical composirion : The fruit contains an essential oil (9 -10%) consisting of aneillol (85 -90%), a-pinene, limoncne, p-phellandrene, a·terpineol, farnesol and safro!. Therapeutic uses: The fruit is considered to be carminative, stomachic and galactagogic. It is also used in treating vomiting, dyspepsia, abdominal pains and food poisoning. The average dose ranges from 4 to 8g per day in the form of a powder or decoction. An alcoholic maceration is prescribed for massage in rheumatism and ostealgia. 2\1 
106 Imperata cylindrica (L.) P. Beauv. Gramineae Local names: Co tranh, cO tranh sang, h\lCh mao, nM ca (ThAi), gan (Dao). English names: Lalang·grass, alang·alang, bedding grass. Description : Perennial herb, 0.60 Ł I.5Om. high. Rhizome hard, coriaccous, descending deeply into the soil. Culms erect, with wiry hairs. Leaves narrow and long, prominently nerved ; scabrous on the upper surface; margins sharp-edged. Inflorescence of many spikes. silver-white. densely silky. Flowering period: Almost throughout the year. Distribution : A common weed everywhere. 
especially in hilly regions. Parts used: The rhizomes. harvested the whole year round. are washed and well dried in the sun or in an oven. Chemical composition : The rhizomes contain glucose. fructose and organic acids. Therapeutic uses: The rhizome. a diuretic and febrifuge, is used in the treatment of urodynia. pollakiuria. haematuria and fever. It is available in the form of a decoction for oral administration. The usual dose is 10 to 40g per day. The drug is often combined with com silk. which enhances its diuretic action. 213 
Ł 107 Jasminum subtriplinerve Blume Oleaeeae Local names: Yfulg, che vfulg, ram tcing, ram ri, lAi ba gan. Description: Small" !railing shrub. Branches glabrous. Leaves opposite, glabrous and shining on both surfaces, 3 nerves from the base. Inflorescence in axillary or tcnninal raceme; flowers 2 -3, white, fragrant Bcrry globose with remains of persistent calyx, black when ripe. Flowering period: March -April. DistribUlwn : Grows wild in the mountains and the midlands. ParIS used: Leaf-bearing twigs, collected all the year round. They are used in the dried state. Cherru'cal COmposili(m The leaves contain alkaloids, resins and flavonoids. TherapeUlic uses: The branches and the leaves posscss antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties. Thcy are used in treating post-partum hyperthermic infection, lymphadenitis, melnus, galactophoritis, leucorrhoea, rheumatism, ost.ealgia, impetigo, prurigo, dysmenorrhoea and haematometra. They are also effective as a bitter tonic for parrurienlS. The daily dose is 20 to 30g in decoction form. A decoction of the fresh leaves is used for washing and bathing in the case of wounds and impetigo and a fresh-leaf poultice is used for abscesses and mastitis. 215 
r I 108 Kaempferia gaJanga L. Zingiberaceae Local names : £>ja Iian. thian Iian. SO'I1 tam Jll!i. sa khU'O'Tlg. co X3 choong (Thai). English name: East Indies galingale. Description: Perennial herbaceous planL Rhizome includes little ovate tubers. Leaves : 2 -3 with broad blade. spreading flat on the ground. appearing annually in rainy season. hairy beneam. Flowers white tinged with violet, sessile. arising from the axil. All parts of the plant, especially the rhiwme. are strongly aromatic. Flowering period: May -JUly. Distribution : Grows wild in the mountains 
and is cultivated in some places for medicinal use. Parts used: The rool-stocks. grubbed up in winter and spring. are well washed. men dried in the sun or in an oven. Che"ucal composition: The rhizomes contain an essential oil (2.4 -3.9%). consisting of p-methoxy uanscinnarnate ethyl. p-memoxy uanscinnamic acid. uanscinnamic acid. p-memoxystyrene, p-coumaric acid. n-pentadecane.l'.3 carene. borneol and camphene. Therapeutic uses: The rhizome is recommended for dyspepsia and is very useful for the treatment of pectoral and abdominal pains. headache. loomache and cold. It is prescribed in decoction. powder or pill form for oral administration. The average doses range from 3 to 6g per day. An alcoholic maceration is employed externally in massage for the treatment of rheumatism. 217 
I L 109 Kalimchoe pinnata (Lam.) Pers. Crassulaceae Local names: Thu&: bOng, cay sOng &ri, truOng sinh, sinh can, c1A Mt tIT, lAu plia sung (Dao). Description: Perennial succulent herb, 40 -6Ocm. high. Stems tubular and glabrous, mottled with purple. Leaves opposite, entire or 3-lobed, rarely 5 -7 -
lobed; blade thick and fleshy; margins crenate. Inflorescence in terminal paniculate cyme with long stalk ; flowers pendulous, rcd or orange· red. Fruit of 4 follicles. Flowering period: January -March. DistribUlion : Commonly found in arid soil and cultivated for ornamenL Parts used: The leaves, whicb can be harvested all the year round, are used fresh. Chemical composition : The whole plant contains bryophyllin and organic acids: citric, isocitric and malic. TherapeUlic uses : The fresh leaves, which possess antibacterial and demulcent properties, are used in the treatment of bums, wounds, impetigo, ulcer, phlegmon and congestive ophthalmia; they are also haemostatic and depurative. They are administered daily in a dose of 20 to 40g in the form of juice. Poultices and ointments are prepared with fresh leaves for external application. 219 
L 110 Lacluca indica L. Composilae Local names : Bo cong anh, mni mac, dicp <Illi. rau bao, phac bao (Tay), lay may kIm (Dao). English name: Indian lettuce. Description: Annual herbaceous plant. 0.5 -1m. high ; rarely branched. Leaves alternate, sessile; the lower deeply lobed; the upper occasionally entire; margins toothed. Inflorescence in terminal head; flowers yellow. Achene small. tipped with a tuft of hairs. All parts of the plant contain a milky juice. Flowering period: June -August. Distribution: Grows wild in waste places. Pa;ts used: The whole plant, except for the roots. It is collected at the beginning of summer. before flowering. The roots are removed and the aerial parts dried in the sun or in dryers. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant, and especially the leaves. is employed as a depurative and demulcent The leaves are used in treating mastitis, galactophoritis. furunculosis and abscesses. They arc also effective for gastralgia and dyspepsia. The usual dose is 8 to 20g pcr day in the form of a decoction, extract or syrup. A mixture with some other plants is used externally in the form of a poultice of pounded fresh l
eaves. 221 
I l 111 Leonurus artemisia (Lour.) S. Y. Hu Labiatae Local names: ich diy ch6i den, sung uy, hnh 10 ('I'Mi), 111m ngai (Tay). English names: Siberian motherwort, lion's tail. Description : Annual herbaceous plant, 0.5 . I 
m. high. Stems quadrangular. Leaves opposite, the basal nearly round, long-petioled, dentate-crenate; the middle long, pinnatipartite; the upper short, usually entire. Flowers white or pink in axillary whorls. Nutlet small, glabrous. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Grows wild in wet places and is also cultivated. Parts used: Shoots carrying young leaves. harvested in summer before flowering a
nd dried in the shade or in dryers at low temperature. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains a flavonoid (rutin), leucoanthocyanoglucosides, steroids, alkaloids, choline, amino acids and tannin. Therapeutic uses: The drug enjoys a long-standing reputation in the trcaunent of irregular menstruation, dysmenorrhoea, polymenorrhoea and post-partum haematometra. II is also used for hypertension and heart disease. It is given in doses of 8 to 109 per day, in the form of a decoction, extract or pills. 223 
Ł I I 112 Leucaena leucocephala (Lam.) De Wit Leguminosae Local names: Keo cay keo, b6 bQ chet, blnh linh, can thin (Thy). English names : Lead tree, white popinac, jumpy bean. Description : Small evergreen tree, several metres in heighL Leaves bipinnate, leaflets small. Howers white in axillary panicle. Pod thin and flat, brownish when ripe. Seeds glabrous, darlc·brown. Flowering period: April· June . . DistribUliOn : Grows wild and is cultivated as a shade tree in coffee plantations. Pqrts used: Seeds of the mature fruil, picked in summer, when the fruit becomes fully ripe. The pods are removed and the seeds obtained are dried in the sun or in ovens . Chemical composition : The seeds contain a fatty oil, consisting of palmitic, stearic, oleic, linoleic, behenic and lignoceric acids and the alkaloid leucenine (Ieucenol) 3·5%. The leaves yield tannin, quercitrin and alkaloids. TherapeUlic uses: The seeds have a beneficial effcct in ascariasis. The usual dose for adults is 25 to 50g, and for children, according to their age,5 to 20g per day, for 3 to 5 days, administered in the morning o
n an empty stomach. The torrefied seeds are prescribed in the form of a powder or sugared cakes. They are occasionally used fresh. 225 
113 Lilium brownii F. E. Brown var. colchesteri Wilson Liliaceae Local names: Bach hQ'P, !Oi rimg, kheo rna (TIIy), xu6n kip pa (Thai), co ngai doi (Dao). English name: Brown's lily. Description: Perennial herbaceous 0.5· 1m. high. Bulb white. Leaves alternate, oblong·lanceolate, subsessile ; margins entire. Flowers 3 . 
5, funnel·shaped, white in terminal raceme. Capsule 3·celled. Seeds numerous, small. Flowering period: May· July. DistribuJion : Grows wild in savannas at an altitude of IOOOm. or above. Parts used: The bulbs, which can be harvested from the end of summer to the middle of autumn, after flowering, when the plants begin to wither. Separated from the plants, the bulbs arc exposed to the sun for some days. When !hey become dryish, !he scales arc separated from each o!her and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The bulbs contain proteins 4%, lipids 0.1 %, gillCides 30%, vitamin C and coJchiceine. TherapeuJic uses: The bulbs arc an effu:tive remedy for dry cough or cough wi!h consistent phlegm, haemoptysis, bronchitis, fever and neuras!henia. They arc also diuretic and useful in oedema. The normal dose is 15 to 30g in !he form of a powder or decoction. In cases of cough willi chest pains and haemoptysis,lIIey arc commonly used fresh, in lIIe form of expressed juice. 227 
, I 114 Lonicera japonica Tbunb. Caprifoliaceae Local names : Kim ngan, day elling, chm. giang khk (TMi), bjooc kim ngAn (Thy). English name : Japanese honeysuckle. Description : A twining evergreen plant, pubescent Stems brownish·red. Leaves opposite, tomentose. Flowers in axiUary pedunculate pairs, often crowded at the end of branchlcts, fragrant, white when blooming, then changing to yellow. Berry globose, black when ripe. Other species, such as Lonicera dasysryla Rehd. ; L. con/usa L. ; L. macrQJItila DC. and L. cambodiana Pierre, are also used medicinally. Flowering period: March . May. Distribulion : Grows wild in the mountains and is cultivated for ornament Parts used: The climbing stems bearing leaves and flowers. They are harveslCd at the beginning of the flowering period and dried at low temperature before use. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains tannins, saponins, luteolin, inositol and a carotenoid: cryptoxanthin. Therapeulic uses : The leaf-bearing stem is antibacterial and antiallergic. It is recommended in the treatment of boils, impetigo, urticaria, allergic rhinitis, fever, malaria, erythema, measles, diarrhoea, dysentery, syphilis, rheumatism and lichen tropicus. The daily dose is 4 to 8g of flowers or 10 to 20g of stems and leaves in the form ofadecoction, infusion, extract or alcoholic maceration. 229 
, I I I I 115 Ludwigia adscendens (L.) Hara Onagraceae Local names: Rau dira n.roc, rau dira triiu, th4Y thuy long, du long thAi, co nha p6t (Thai), phjac p6p (Thy). English name: Floating Malayan willow-herb. Description: Aquatic herb, creeping by means of ovate, white, porous floats. Stems slender, rooting at the nodes. Leaves alternate, oval, base long, apex round. Flowers white, solitary in the axil of the leaves. Capsule long, villous. Seeds numerous. Flowering period: June -August. Distribution : A common weed found everywhere in rice-fields, ponds and swamps. PariS used: The whole plant, except for the roots. It is harvested from June to November and dried before use. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant, exccp! the roots, is recommended as an antibacterial and diuretic in cases of fever, cystitis, dysuria, oliguria, haemalUria, chyluria, haematochyluria and haemorrhagic dysentery. The dried plant is administered in a dose of 100 to 200g per day, in the form of a decoction. External application of poultices made of pounded fresh plant matter is prescribed against snake-bite, bums, impetigo and diseases of the scalp. 231 
Ł 116 Lycium chinense Mill. Solanaceae Local names: cau IcY, Ielu; khOi, khOi nr, c1ia c6t bl, phj3c khau khi ('Thy). English names : Otinese box·thorn, Otinese desert thorn, Otinese wolfberry, Chinese matrimony vine. Description: Small shrub, 0.5 -1m. high ; branches spinulous. Leaves alternate or in fascicles of 3 -
5, short-petioled; margins entire. Flowers small, pale-violet, solitary or fascicled in the axil of the leaves. Berry ovoid, bright red when ripe. Seeds numerous, small. Flowering period: July -October . DistribuJion : Largely cultivated for its leaves, eaten as a vegelable ; the roots and seeds are medicinal. Parts used: Ripe fruit, root-baric. The fruits are picked from August to October, early in the morning and late in the afternoon. They are spread in thin layers to dry in the shade. When the pericarp begins to wrinkle, they are dried in the direct sun or in ovens at a temperarure of 40 -45°C. The roots are collected in spring and autumn; after they have been well washed, the barli: is removed and dried in the sun or in ovens. ChenUcal composition: The berries contain salts of Ca, Fe, N1l4 ; p ; vilamin C, nicotinic acid, carotene ; amino acids (lysine, choline, betaine) ; lipids, proteins and hydrocyanic acid. The root-barli: yields saponins 1.07%, alkaloids 0.08%. TherapeUtic uses: The fruit is used in treating general debility, impotence, spermatorrhoea. lumbago, amblyopia, vertigo and diabetes mellitus. It also has rejuvenating properties. The daily dose is 4 to l6g in the form of a decoction or alcoholic maceration. The root-bark is effective for haemoptysis, night sweats and haematuria The dose is 6 to l2g daily in the form of a decoction. 233 
117 Maclura cochincbinensis (Lour.) Corner Moraceae Local names: Mo QI)3. ho1log 16. cay b6m, sqng vang, gai mang, nam phjt (T1Iy), gai v1log 16. Description: Spreading shrub; baric grey, spotted with white. Stems and branches with incurved spines. Leaves alternate, shining green above. Flowers dioecious, pale-yellow; the male long-pedicelled in a short raceme, lhe female sessile in a dense 3J<illary head. Fruit: a syncarp. All pans of lhe plant contain a milky juice. Flowering period: April -May. Distribution: Grows wild in lhe hills and mountains and on roadsides. Parts used: The roots and leaves, coUeetcd all lhe year round. The roots are used dried and lhe leaves fresh. Chem;cai composition : 1be roots and leaves contain flavonoids. Therapeutic uses: The fresh leaves, stripped of lheir petioles and finely pounded, or a decoction of leaves, are used in poultices for lhe healing of wounds of the soft pans. For penecrating wounds, poultices are applied on boIh sides and covered with a dressing. Poultices and dressings are changed once a day. The roots arc effective in rheumatism, oedema, blood stasis, dysmenorrhoea and contusions. They are used in a dose of 10 10 30g per day, in lhe form of a decoction. 235 
118 Malus doomeri (Bois.) A. Cbev. Rosaceae Local names: Son tra, san (Tay), chua cMt, cay gao. co sam sa (Th:\i). Description: Evergreen tree, up to 15m. high. Young stems spinous and pubescenL Leaves alternate, ovate, base round, apex pointed; margins toothed; pubescent when young, then glabrous. Inflorescence in axillary cluster ; nowers 3 -
5, white. Drupe globose, slightly compressed, greenish-yeUow when ripe, edible. The species Docynia indica (WaiL) Decne is also used medicinally. Flowering period: February -M=h. DislribUJion : Grows wild and is'cultivated in mountainous regions. ParIS used: The fruit, coUected at the end of the year, is halved and dried in the sun. Chemical composition: The fruit contains tannin, sugars, and tartaric and cilric acids. TherapeuJic uses: The fruit possesses stomachic properties. It is used in treating dyspepsia, colic, Oatulence, diarrhoea and colic consequent upon post-panum hacmatometra. It is also antihypertensive and anodyne. The usual dose is 8 to 20g in the form of a decoction. liquid extract, powder or pills. Bathing and washing with a decoction of the fruit are effective against impetigo and lacquer aUergic dermatitis. 237 
I l 119 Melaleuca leucadendra (L.) L. Myrtaceae Local names: Tram, che che cay, thien tftng, co tram (Thai). English names: Cajeput tree, paper bark tree. Description: Erect evergreen tree, up 10 10m. high. Bark white, soft. peeling off in rough flakes. Leaves alternate, entire, thick, incurvedly nerved with whitish villi when young. Inflorescence in more or less interrupted elongate terminal spike; flowers small, creamy white. Capsule subgloOOse, many-seeded. Flowering period: March -May. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the hills and in salt-marshes. Parts used: The leaves, harvested at the beginning of summer, are dried before usc. An essential oil can be obtained by distillation of the leaves. Chemical composition: The leaves yield an essential oil consisting of cineol 50 -65%, a-terpineol and its esters, L-a-pinene, L-limonene, dipentene, sesquiterpene, azulene, sesquitcrpene alcohol, valerianic aldehyde and benzaldehyde. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves possess antibacterial, anti-innammalOry and anodyne properties. They are effectivc for coryza, innuen7"!, cough, asthma, dyspepsia, earache, toothache, rheumatism, osteodynia, neuralgia, wounds, bums and post-partum hacmalOmctra. The normal dose is 20 to 40g of fresh leaves or 5 10 109 of dried leaves in the form of a decoction or infusion. An essential oil solution is prescribed for massage and for oral administration, parenteral injection or nasal instillation. 239 
120 Melia azedarach L. Meliaceae Local names : Xoan, sAo <lAu, kh6 lIll!y ,;in (Thy). English names: Margosa tree, China berry, Barbados lilac, pride of India, Persian lilac, bead tree, hoop tree. Description: A tree 10m. high or more. Barle pale-brown,lenticeliate, longitudinally furrowed. Leaves alternate, odd-pinnate ; leaflets opposite, serrate, glabrous on both sides. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal biparous cyme ; flowers white-lilac. Drupe ovate or ellipsoid-globose with 4 seeds, yellow when ripe. Flowering period: March -April. Distributinn : Cultivated everywhere for wood. Parts used: Root-bark, collected from the trees when they reach 7 -8 
years of age. The bark is scraped to remove the outside black skin, then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical compositinn : The stem-bark and root-barle contain the alkaloid azaridine (margosine), sterols and tannins. The leaves yield the alkaloid paraisine and the flavonoid rutin. The seeds are rich in fatty oil consisting of stearic, palmitic, oleic and linoleic acids. Therapeutic uses : The internal silky layer of the torrefied root-bark is used in treating ascariasis and oxyuriasis; it is less toxic than the trunk bark. The usual dose for adults is 2 to 3g per day, for 3 days, and for children,according to their age, 0.1 to \.5g per day. Vaginal injection of the decoction is effective for trichomonas infections. Precautions must be taken because of the drug's high toxicity. 241 -I-
121 Mentha arvensis L. Labiatae Local names : ha, h3 nam. niim. phjiic hom (Tay). English names: Field mint. com mint, Japanese mint, Japanese pepperminL Description : Perennial herb, 30 -5Ocm. high, usually withered in winter. Stems quadrangular, erect or prostrate, rooting at the nodes. Leaves opposite, ovate, softly tomentose on both sides ; margins s
errate. Inflorescence in 3llillary capitate whorl; flowers small, white or lilac. All partS of the plant are aromatic. The species Mentha piperita L. is also used medicinally. Flowering period : June -S
eptember. Distribution : Grows wild in the mountains and is cultivated everywhere. Parts used: The whole plant, apart from the roots. is harvested berore flowering. when the weather is dry. The plants are used rresh or dried in the shade or in ovens at low temperature. An essential oil can be obtained rrom the leaves by distillation. Chemical composition : The whole plant yields an essemial oil consisting or L-menthol 65 -85%, menthyl acetate, L-menthone, L-a-pinene, L-Iimonene. Therapeutic uses: The entire plant, apart rrom the roots, is antibacterial and antirebrile. It yields an essential oil and menthol which exert, through their rapid evaporation, a slightly anaesthetic and anodyne local errect. It is errective in coryza, adiaphoretic rever, headache, rhinitis, c
ough, sore throat, arthralgia, neuralgia. colic, vomiting, dyspepsia, diarrhoea and prurigo. The normal daily dose is 12 to 20g in the rorm or a d
ecoction or inrusion. The essential oil and menthol are the constituents or several balsams. Poultices or rresh leaves and the inhalation or essential oil and menthol are also prescribed. 243 
122 Millettia speciosa Champ. Legum inosae Local names: Oit sam, sam nam, sam Irnu, sam choo moo, hay chon (Tay). Description: Woody climber, reaching 5 -
6m. Roots fleshy. Young shoots hoary. Leaves odd-pinnate, alternate, pubescent, especially when young. Inflorescence in axiUary or tenninal raceme; flowers white or paJe-yeUow. Pod compressed, pubescent. Seeds 2 -
5, subquadrangular. Flowering period: June -August DistribuJion : Grows wild in forests and in the hills. Parts used: Tuberous roots, coUected from the one-year -old After being washed, they are dried in the sun or in dryers, then cut into slices, soaked in an aqueous extract of ginger or in molasses, then lightly roasted before use. TherapeuJic uses : The tuberous roots possess reconstituent and antitussive properties. They are utili7..ed in the treatment of general debility, anorexia, phlegmy cough (soaked in ginger juice and torrefied). and headache, dry cough, thirsty evening fever, dysuria (soaked in honey and torrefied). The usual dose is 15 to 30g, occasionally 40g, in the form of a decoction or powder. 245 
123 Momordic:a cocbindJinensis (Lour.) Spreng-Cucurbitaceae Local names : Gac, "* mi!1, rnA kMu ('I'Mi), moc khftu (Thy). c1la t3 pi!u (Dao). Description : Twining perennial with tendrils. Leaves alternate. deeply 3 -5 -
lobed ; margins toothed ; leaf-stalk glandular. Flowers unisexual, monoecious, pale-yellow, solitary in the axil of the leaves. Fruit big, oval-shaped, densely aculeate, red when ripe. Seeds round, compressed, the margins sculptured. Flowering period: July -October. DistribUlwn : Cultivated everywhere for its edible fruit. Parts used: Seed membranes, kernels. roots. The ripe fruit is picked from August to February. The seed membranes are lightly dried at low temperature. An oil can be extracted from them. The seed kernels are dried in the sun or in ovens. An oil can be pressed out of the kernels. Roots are collected in winter. They are washed, then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical compositwn : The seed membranes contain and Iycopene. The seed kernels yield a fatty oil, the roots contain triterpenoid saponins. TherapeUlic uses: The seed membrane is rich in and is used in treating infantile rickets, xerophthalmia and nyctalopia. The oil extracted from the membranes is given in doses ranging from ten to twenty drops for adults and five to ten drops for children per day. The juice of kernels triturated in alcohol or vinegar is applied locally for furunculosis and phlegmon. In cases of rheumatism the roots are prescrihed in the form of a decoction in doses of 6 to 12g per day. 247 
r 124 Morinda citrifolia L. Rubiaceae Local names : rung, cay ngao. English names : Indian mulberry, East Indian mulberry, awl tree. Description : Medium-sized tree, 6 -
8m. in heighL Young twigs angular, slightly compressed and grooved. Leaves opposite, stipulifcrous ; shining green above, pale below; margins undulate. Inflorescence in dense ovoid head, opposite to the leaf; flowers white, then yellow. Fruit ovoid, including many drupelets, yellow when ripe. Seeds numerous, embedded in the pulp. Flowering period: November -February. Distribution: Grows wild and is extensively cultivated in the south of VietNam. Ports used : Roots, fruit and leaves. The roots are collected in winter, the fruit in summer and the leaves in spring. They are all used in the dried state. Chemical composition: The root-bark contains morindon, morindin, morindadiol, soranjidiol, rubichloric acid, alizarin a-methyl ether, and rubiadin I-methyl ether. Therapeutic uses: The root-bark has a beneficial effect in hypertension, osteodynia and lumbago; it is prescribed in a dose of 10 to 20g daily in the form of a decoction or alcoholic maceration of torrefied material. A decoction o( the leaves taken by mouth is effective for fever, dysentery and diarrhoea. A poultice of pounded fresh leaves cures furunculosis. The taken together with a little is stomachic, and active on dysentery, uterine haemorrhage, melrorrhoea, cough, coryza, oedema and neuralgia 249 
I I f 125 Morinda officinalis How Rubiaceae Local names: Sa kfch, ba kfch thien, day ruQt ga. cMu ph6ng xl, say cay (Thai), thau tay cay (Tay), ch6i hoang kim, chay kiang doi (Dao). Description : Perennial slender climbing shrub. Young shoots violel, hairy. Leaves opposile, 
oblong, hairy on both sides. Stipule lubular. Inflorescence in axillary panicle; flowers small, while. Fruil globose, scarlel when ripe, 2-sceded. Flowering period: May -June. DistribUlion : Indigenous to north Viet Nam, commonly found wild in hilly and mountainous regions. Parts used: Roots, collected all the year round, especially in autumn and winter. After the radicles have been stripped off, the roots arc well washed and exposed to the sun for some days, then flaltened and dried in the s
un or in ovens. Chemical composition : The roots contain organic acids, sugars, resins, vitamin C, an essential oil, anthraglucosides and phytoslerols. Therapeutic uses: The roots are reported 10 exert a tonic effect They are useful in treating impotence, spermatorrhoea, delayed menstruation, hypertension and rheumatism. They are prescribed in the form of a decoction, liquid extract or elixir in doses ranging from 8 to 16g per day. 251 
L 126 Morus acidosa Griff. Moraceae Local names: Dau !fun, clau cang (H'mOng). tang, mQn (Tay), nful phong (Dao). Description: Small plant, 2 -
3m. high, occasionally reaching 5 -
6m. when old. Leaves alternate, entire or trilobed ; margins toothed; 3 nerves from the base. Flowers unisexual, monoecious, in axillary spike (catkin). Fruit: a syncarp of many drupes, initially red then dark purple to black. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Cultivated for its leaves, used as food for silk-worms, and its edible fruit, used in elixirs and drugs. Parts used: Leaves, fruit and root-bark. The leaves are harvested at the beginning of summer. Root-bark is coUected all the year round. Fruit is picked when ripe. The leaves and root-bark are used fresh or dried. The fruit is used fresh. Chemical composition : The leaves contain amino acids phenylalanine, leucine, alanine, arginine, sarcosine; pipercholic acid proteins ; vitamins C, B I, D; orgartic acids : succinic, propionic and isobulyric ; tannin. Therapeutic uses: The leaves arc used in treating coryza, cough and insomnia, in a daily dose of 610 18g in the form of a decoction. The rbark is employed in the treatment of asthma, oliguria, rheumatism and oSleodynia, in a dose of 6 to 12g daily in the form of a decoction. The fruit in elixir and syrup form is prescribed for anaemia and dysopia, the usual dose being 12 to 20g per day. Syrup made of the ripe fruit serves as a mouth-wash in cases of sore throat and ulcerous stomatitis. 253 
I L 127 Murraya glabra Guill. Rutaceae Local names: Yuung rung, ell khi, h6ng bl nui, san hoang bi, xi hgc (H'moog), SQ khi, cay ton. Description : Medium-sized bush, 3 . 
7m. high. Young shoots reddish-purple. Leaves allemate, imparipinnate, including 4 -7 
leaflets, thick, entire or minutely dentate. Inflorescence in tenninal corymbiferous cyme ; flowers white, fragrant. Berry subglobose, rough, with glands, red when ripe. All parts of the plant, especially the leaves and fruit, are strongly aromatic. Flowering period: April· June. Distribution: Common wild plant among limestone rocks. Parts used: The leaves and roots, collected the whole year round, are used fresh or dried. An essential oil can be extracted from the leaves by distillation. Chemical composition: The whole plant, especially the leaves and fruit, yield an essential oil containing isomenthone and menthone. Therapeutic uses: The leaves and roots give beneficial results in the treatment of influenza, headache and abdominal pains. They are also useful for the treatment of rheumatism and arthralgia. The usual dose is 8 
to 16g per day in the form of a decoction. The essential oil from the leaves is used externally as a liniment In cases of luxation or closed fracture the leaves are crushed and employed locally as a poultice. 255 
I 128 Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn. Nymphaeaceae Local names: Sen, lien, b6 bua (Tllai), (Tay). English names : Sacred lotus, Chinese water·lily, Indian lotus, Egyptian bean, baladi bean. Description: Perennial aquatic herb. Root·stock stoUl, cylindrical, embedded in the mud Leaves pell3te, radialely nerved ; margins wavy ; petiole long, inserted in the middle of the leaf. Flowers large, solilary, handsome and fragranl, rosy or white. Carpels numerous, ovoid, fleshy, sunk separately in cavities of receplaCle, maturing inlO nul·like achenes ; skin hard and blackish-brown wben ripe. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlwn : Common, cultivated in ponds and swamps. Parts used: Leaves, seeds, recepl3Cles, fllaments and plumules. The leaves can be harvesled in aurumn ; the flowers in summer. The seeds are collected wben fully ripe. Leaves and seeds are dried in Ihe sun or in dryers . . The pericarps are removed before the seeds are used. The recepl3cles wilhoUl seeds are dried before use. Chemical composition: The leaves conlain alkaloids : nuciferine, roemerine, nor-nuciferineand the flavonoid: quercetin. The plumules yield proteins, sugars and vil3mins. The receplacles conlain quercetin. Therapeutic uses: The ripe seeds produce a wholesome effect in cases of neurasthenia, spermatorrhoea and mettorrhoea, in a daily dose of 10 to 30g in the form of a decoction or powder. The leaves (15 to 20g) and the seed cores (2 to 4g) in decoction are effective for insomnia, haemorrhage and haemalemesis. The plumules (6 to 12g), Ihe fllaments (5 to 109) or Ihe receptaCles (15 to 30g) in Ihe form of a decoction are used in tteating bloody stools, haematuria, uterine haemorrhage and haematemesis. 257 
I I I t 129 Nerium odorum Soland. A pocynaceae Local names: Truc ciao, ciao Ie. English names : Roseberry spurge, sweet·scented oleander, rose·bay. Description: Small evergreen bush, 5 -6m. high, much-branched. Young shoots triangular. Bark ash-coloured. Leaves in whorls of 3, oblong-Ianceolate, dark-green above. Innorescence in terminal cyme; nowers pink, white or yellow. Follicles in pairs, narrow, cylindrical, straight. Seeds numerous, tipped with a coma of brownish hairs at one end. Flowering period: May .. July. Distribulion: Cultivated for its elegant foliage and handsome nowers. Parts used: The leaves, harvested just before or during the nowering period and immediately dried in the sun or in dryers. Chem;cal composition: The leaves contain cardiotonic glucosides oleandrin, neriifolin, adynerin and neriantin; and navonol glucosides : rutin, kacmpferol-3 rhamnoglucoside. Therapeulic uses: Oleandrin (neriolin) eXlTacled from the leaves has a salutary effect in heart failure. It is more quickly absorbed by mouth and is less cumulative than digitoxin. It is prcscribedorallyinadoseofO.lmg, 2 to 3 times per day in the form of a 1/5000 solution in 70° alcohol or of 0.1 mg tablets. An aqueous maeeration of the pounded seeds can be used as an insecticide. 259 
Ł 130 Nervil'" fordii (Hance) Schltr. OHilidaceae . Local names: Cay mQt la, thanh wen qui, triUl chAu Ian 00, slam (ai, bua thoQc (fay). Dtscription : A perennial herb, dying down in winter and reappearing in spring. Tuber small, fleshy ; stems very short. wves I'OIIIId or heart·shaped. usually single ; margins undulate. Infloresceace ill gpiIoc. arising from !lie IUber before the leaves; flowers white with pllllcisll·vio!et spots. Capsule many·seeded. Flowering period : March· April. DistribUlion: Grows wild in wet places in mountainous regions. Parts used: The leaves, harvested in aulUmn. are washed. then dried at low temperature. During drying, the leaves are lightly rumpled 2·3 times a day. They can be steamed before drying. Therapeutic uses : The leaves are used in. treating pulmonary tuberculosis, cough and furunculosis. They may also be used as a depurative:The daily dose is 10 to 20g in the form of an infusion or decoction. Poultices of the pounded leaves are used against impetigo, furunculosis and painful inflammation . 261 
l 131 Ocimum gratissimum L. Labiatae Local names : Huung nhu b'fuJg, e ta 160. English names : Lemon basil, large basil, shrubby basil. Description: Much-branched perennial shrub, I -
J.5m. high. Stems quadrangular, pubescent, woody at the base. Leaves opposiLe, apiculate, pubescent on both surfaces ; margins coarsely toothed. Inflorescence axillary or Lerminai in simple or branched whorled raceme; flowers while. Nutlets subglobose, rugose. All parts of the plant are strongly scented. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlion : Grows wild but is cultivated for its essential oil. Parrs used: The whole plant, except for the roots. It is harvested during the flowering period and after the roots have been removed, it is lightly dried in the sun or in an oven at low temperature. Chemical composirion : The whole plant contains an essential oil (0.6 -0
.8%), consisting of eugenol 45 -70%, methyl eugenol 20%, carvacrol, ocimene, p-cymene, camphene, limonene, a-pinene and TherapeUlic uses: The whole plant is used in treating sunstroke, headache and influenza. It is also considered to be diaphoretic. It is given in doses ranging from 6 to 12g per day, in the form of an inhalation or decoction. It serves also as maLeriai for the extraction of essential oil and eugenol. Eugenol is used widely in odontology and for the synthesis of vanillin. 263 
, I r I I Local names : Hl1'O'I1g nhu t!a, t tCa, t ciO. English names: Monk's basil, sacred basil, holy basil, rough basil, tulsi. Description : small annual or perennial, about 1m. in heighL Stems SlId branchlets purple, pubescenL Leaves opposite, lISuaUy purplish-brown,long-petioled ; margins slightly denticulate, pubescent on both surfaces. Inflorescence in close-whorled terminal raceme ; flowers small, lilac or white. Nutlets sub-globose, slightly compressed. All parts of the plant are sweet-scented. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlion : Cultivated everywhere for medicinal use. Parts used: The whole plant, except for the roots. It is harvested during the flowering period. The roots are removed and the plants lightly dried in the sun or in an oven at low temperature. Chemical composition : The whole plant yields an essential oil consisting of eugenol, methyl eugenol, carvacrol, a-cymene, p-cymene, camphene, a-pinene and p-pinene. TherapeUlic uses : The entire except for the roots, possesses antibacterial, antifebrile and demulcent properties. It is prescribed for coryza, fever, headache, colic, diarrhoea, chest pains, vomiting, chilblains, oedema and.epistaxis. The usual dose is 6to 12g per day in the form of a decoction, either by mouth or as an inhalation. The decoction serves also as a gargle for halitosis: 109 of plant material is boiled for IS minutes with 200 ml of water. 265 
133 Ophiopogon japonicus (L.r.) Ker. -Gawl. Liliaceae Loc31 names : mon, t6c tien, lan tien, duyen gi6i thilo, xa !hIlo, phiec kep (Tay). Description: A stoloniferous perennial herb, growing in tufts with tuberous roots, fleshy. Leaves linear, long, dark-green above, pale below, with numerous parallel nerves. Inflorescence in axiUary spike with long stalk; flowers small, pale-green. Berry globose, violet then silvery grey. Flowering period: June -August. DistribUlion : Grows wild among limestone rocks and is also cultivated in gardens for ornament and medicinal use. Paris used: Tuberous roots of 2-year-old plants, collected from September to December. The well· washed roots are dried in the sun or in dryers after the two ends and the core have been removed. Chemical composition : The tuberous roots contain mucilage and sugars (glucose, fucose, rhamnose, xylose); ophiopogenins A,B,C,D ; ruscogenin. TherapeUlic uses .-The tuberous roots possess expectorant and antitussive properties. They have a beneficial effect in sore throat, bronchitis, tuberculosis, haemoptysis, haematemesis, evening fever with thirst, epistaxis, oliguria, hypogalactia, galactophoritis and constipation. The daily dose is 6 to 20 g in the form of a decoction, pills or syrup. 267 
I 134 Oroxylum illdicum (L.) Vent. Bignoniaceae Local names: Nllc nac, nam hOOng boI, ml)c M ca ('Thy), co ca (Thai), p'w (K'OO), kO' Illc (K'dong), p6c ta lOp (Ba Na). English names : Indian trumpet flower, broken bones, midday marvel. Description: Medium-sized tree, up to 10m. high, with sparse branches. Bark rough, thick, asli-eoloured and yellowish inside. Leaves large, tripinnate, up to 105m. long. Inflorescence in terminal raceme; flowers large, darlc: reddish-brown. Capsule ensate, curved, with numerous winged seeds. Flowering period: June -August. Distribu/wn : Grows wild in mountainous regions and cultivated everywhere. is also ParIS used: Stem-bark and root-bark are collected all the year round, together with the seeds from ripe fruit: all dried hefore use. Chemical composition: The root-bark and stem-bark contain flavonoids : oroxyun A, baicalein, chrysin. The seeds contain baicalein and tetuin (baicalein-6 glucoside). Therapeu/ic uses: The root·bark and stem-bark possess antiallergic properties and are used in treating allergic diseases, urticaria, jaundice, asthma, SO(e laryngitis, hoarseness, gastralgia, diarrhoea, dysentery, infantile erythema and measles. The normal dose is 8 to 16g of bark in the form of a decoction, extract or powder. The seeds are active on chronic cough and gastcalgia: 5 to 109 daily in the form of a decoction or powder. An alcoholic maceration of fresh bark is applied externally for lacquer allergic dermatitis. 269 
13S Orthosiphon aristatus (Blume) Miq. Local names: Rau moo, cay b6ng English names : Java tea, kidney tea plant Labiatae Description: Perennial herb, 0.5· 1m. high. Stems erect, quadrangular, usually tinged violet-brown. Leaves opposite, short-petioled, coarsely lOOlhed ; apex acute. Inflorescence in a close-whorled raceme at the end of the branches ; flowers white, stamens and pistil exserted. Nutlets oblong, compressed, rugulose. Flowering period : April -July. DisrribUlion : A rare wild plant in mountainous regions but cultivated in some places. Parts used: The whole plant, except for the roots. The plant is harvested in March and April, before flowering; the roots are removed and the plants well washed and then dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains a bitter glucoside: orthosiphonin, saponins, alkaloids, tannin, essential oil, flavonoids, triterpettoid alcohol, choline, betaine, organic acids (tartaric, citric and glycolic), and potassium salts. TherapeUlic uses: The entire plant. except for the roots, possesses diuretic properties and is used in !reating urinary lithiasis, oedema, eruptive fever, influenza, rheumatism, hcpatitis, jaundice and biliary lithiasis. The usual dose is 15 10 40& in the form of an infusion, decoction, or liquid exlract. A course of .lrealrnent normally takes 8 days, followed by a pause of 2 to 4 days. 271 
136 Paederia foetida L. Rubiaceae Local names: MO' tam tIi, dlly thOi c1jt. 14 mO', d&n eM, khau cit rna (fAy), co lOt rna (TMi). English names: Chinese moon-creeper, king's tonic, stinking opalberry. Description : Perennial climbing plant Leaves opposite, margins entire, purple benealh. Inflorescence in axillary cyme ; flowers small, white wilh pale-violet spots. Fruit sub-ovoid, slightly compressed, glabrous. The whole plant is covered wilh pubescence; it has a fetid smell when crushed. Flowering period: August -October. Distribution: Grows wild and is also cultivated as a spice and medicinal plant Parts used: Fresh leaves, collected Ihe whole year round. Chemical composition : The leaves contain an essential oil and alkaloids a-paederine and l3-paederine. Therapeutic uses: The leaves are well known for Iheir antidysenteric properties and are indicated in Ihe treatment of bacillary dysentery. The single dose is 30 to 50g of fresh leaves, which are fme-<:ut and mixed wilh a hen egg, Ihen covered wilh banana leaves and grilled, or fried (wilhout fat) in a frying-pan,lhen administered 2 to 3 times per day, for 5 to 8 days, A decoction of Ihe leaves is also used in treating urinary lilhiasis, dysuria, rheumatism, dyspepsia. gastritis and enteritis. 273 
137 Panax bipinnatilidus Seem. Araliaceae Local names: Tam thit hoang. va lam !nie nhan sam, lam 13 xc. English name : 
Wild false-ginseng. Description: Perennial herb. Tuberous lOOts. l
ong and many-noded. Stems erect, 30 -50 em. high, usually withered in the dry season. Leaves palmate, with 2 -3 
in a whorl; leaflets 5 -7 ,long, irregularly lobed; margins toothed and ciliated.lnflorescence in tcnninal simple umbel; flowers small. greenish-white. Berry scarlet when ripe, 1 . 
2 . 
seeded. Flowering period: July -September. Distribution: Grows wild in the mountains a
t an altitude of about 16OOm. a
nd above. Parts used: The tuberous roots of old plants are well washed and then dried in the sun or in dryers. Therapeutic uses: The roots, which possess tonic and antianaemie properties, arc used in treating anaemia and general debility and arc especially valuable in treating parturients for those conditions. They are also aphrodisiac and have salutary effects in the treatment of sterility. The daily dose is 5 t
o 6
g in the fonn of a powder or elixir. 275 
138 Panax pseudo-ginseng WaD_ Araliaceae Local names : Tam IMt, sam tam th&, lh6 sam, kim Mt hOOn. English name: False ginseng. Description: Perennial herb. Tuberous roots, short and fleshy. Stems erect, 30 -50 em. high, usually withered in the dry season. Leaves palmate, long-petioled in whorl; leaflets 5 -7, margins dentate, hairy on both sides. Inflorescence in terminal simple umbel; flowers small, yellowish-green. Berry globose, slightly compressed, red when ripe, 2 -
seeded. Flowering period: May -July. DislribuJion : Cultivated in cold, climatic regions. ParIS used: Tuberous roots, obtained from plants over 5 years old. After being well washed, the roots are dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : The tuberous roots contain triterpenoid saponins (saponins A, B, C, D), oleanolic acid, amino acids: leucine, valine, proline, oxyproline, histidine, lysine and cysteine; Fe, Ca TherapeuJic uses: The roots possess well known haemostatic, tonic, hormonal and circulation-promoting properties and have a beneficial effect in haem.temesis, metrorrhagia. menorrhagia, post-partum haem.tometra, ocular congestion, bloody stools, epistaxis, rheumatism, phlegmon and contusions. They are also effective in cases of anaemia and general debility, especially in parturients, and sterility. The usual dose is 4 to 6g in the form of a powder, decoction or liquid extract 277 
139 Papaver somniferum L. Papaveraceae Local names: Thu6c a phien, a phil dung, anh tllc, cay thAu, co khofut (Thai), chii' gia dinh (H'mong), lao fen (TIIy). English names: Opium poppy, white poppy. Description: Erect annual herb, 
about Im.high. Stems slender, glabrous. Leaves alternate, sessile, amplexicaul, irregularly lobed and toothed. Flowers large, handsome, of various shades : white, searlet or lilac, solitary at the top, with long stalk. Capsule globular, longitudinally grooved. Seeds numerous, small and black. Flowering period: March -May. DislribUlion : Cultivated in the highlands. Paris used: Latex obtained by incising unripe capsules ; dry capsules without latex. The collection of latex stans in the middle of Fcbruary and lasts until the middle of April. The latex collected is concentrated by evaporation to yicld opium. After the latex has been drawn off, the capsules are picked and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical Composilion : The latex is rich in alkaloids : morphine, codeine, thebaine, narcotine, narceine and papaverine; organic acids : meconic, lactic, malic, tartaric, citric. acetic and succinic; it contains in addition proteins, dextrose and pectin. TherapeUlic uses: The latex possesses hypnotic, analgesic, antitussive and antidiarrhoeal properties. It is also effective in dyspnoea consequent upon heart failure. It is preseribed daily in a dose of 0.005-0.02g according 10 the amount of morphine. The cure is limited 10 7 days. The capsules from which the latex has been drawn off are used in treating chronic cough, penussis, and diarrhoea, in a daily dose of 4 10 8g. 279 
140 Passinora foelida L. Passifloraceae Local names: 4c ticn, day nMn 16ng, chum bao, day IWi, co h6ng ticn (Thai), mac quanh mon English names: Stinking passion flower, tagua passion nower, hispid granadilla. Description : Perennial climber with tendrils. Stems hollow, tubular. Leaves alternate, trilobed. Flowers white, solitary in the axil of leaves; coronal violet. Fruit globose, enveloped by remains of pinnatifid bracts, yellow when ripe, edible; seeds numerous. The whole plant is densely hirsute. Flowering period: May -July. Distribution: Found wild among shrubs. Parts used: The whole plant, harvested in spring and summer. The roots are removed and the plants dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The fruit, seeds and leaves contain an unstable substance that yields hydrocyanic acid and acelDne. The ripe fruit yields Ca, P,Fe. Therapeutic uses: The whole plant is considered ID have sedative properties and is used in the treatment of neurasthenia, insomnia, nightmares and anxiety. It is also indicated for hypertension in the form of a decoction, fluid extract or syrup. The average dose ranges from 20 to 40g per day. 281 
I I 141 Perilla frutescens (L.) Britton Labiatae Local names: Tfa to, llr to, hom 10, hom <leng (Thai), fan CU"a (Thy), cln pharr (Dao). English name: Perilla. Description: Small aromatic plant, 0.5 -1m. high. Stems 4 -angled, slriate. Leaves opposite, long-petioled, coarsely serrate, pale-green or purplish-violet above, purplish-violet beneath. Inflorescence in tenninal whorled spike ; flowers white. Achcne of 4 nutlets. All parts of the plant are covered with a dense pubescence. The variety Perilla ocymoides L. var. bicolorlaciniata is of greater value. Flowering period: May -August. DistributilJn : Cultivated in gar<lens as a spice and medicinal planL Parts used: The whole except for the roots. The leaves are harvested before the plant flowers, then branches are collected ; the fruit is picked from plants cultivated exclusively for that purpose. They are lightly dried in the sun or in ovens at a low temperature. Chemical composition : The whole plant contains an essential oil conslsung of perilla-aldehyde (4-isopropenyl l-cyclohexen-7-al) ; limonene, a-pinene, and dihydrocumine. The seeds yield a fatty oil, containing oleic, linoleic 
and linolenic acids; and amino acids: arginine, histidine, leucine, lysine and valine. Therapeutic uses: In the therapy of influenza, coryza and headache, the plant is recommended 'in the fonn of a decoction. The drug is also useful in cases of threatened abortion. It is prescribed in doses ranging from 6 to 109 of leaves and twigs. The fruit is effective against cough in doses of 3 to 5g per day in the fonn of a decoction. 283 
L 142 Phellodendron amurense Rupr. Local names : Holing M, holing English name: Amur cork tree Rutaceae Description: A tree 15m. or more in height, much-brnnched. Trunk bark thick, yellow inside. Leaves imparipinnate, of 5 -
13 leaflets. Inflorescence in terminal panicle ; flowers unisexual, greenish-yellow. Fruit globose, 2 -5 -
seeded, dark-violet when ripe. Flowering period: May -November. Distribution: Naturalized in mountainous regions, up to 1500m. ParIS used: The lrunk bark, collected from April to July. After the periderm has been scraped off. the baric is dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : The lrunk bark contains 0.6% berberine, palmatine. obakunone, obakulactone and sterols. Therapeutic uses : The lrunk bark, which possesses antibacterial properties, is used in treating jaundice following cholecystitis, boils on the chin, urinary duct inflammation, chyluria, dysentery, diarrhoea, dyspepsia, haemorrhoids. ophthalmia. otitis. spermatorrhoea, leucorrhoea, fever and night sweats. The usual daily dose is 6 to 12g in the form of a decoction, powder or purified berberine. A poultice is prescribed for furunculosis and wounds. 285 
143 Pbyllanthus urinaria L. Euphorbiaceae Local names: Ch6 dC, eM de rang Clnl, cam rut d£t, cMu, khaD ham Description: Diffuse annual Dr perennial herb, 20 . 
3Ocm. high. Stems glabrous, usually purplish. Leaves alternate, very ShOO-petiDled, prominently arranged in two' rows, resembling a pinnate leaf. RDwers minule, yellDwish, unisexual, solitary in the axils ; 
both sexes Dn the same plant Capsule withDut stalk, glDbose, slightly compressed, echinate. Flowering period: April· Apgust Distribution: CommDn weed everywhere. Parts used: The whDle plant, harvesled the whDle year round but especially in summer, is commDnly used fresh, occasiDnally dried. Chemical composition: The whDle plant cDntains bitter substances, a1kaIDids. Therapeutic uses: The whDle plant, which possesses antibacterial and demulcent properties, is useful in the treatment Df sore throat, boils, especially Dn the chin, impetigo., infantile cheek eczema, tongue thrush, arthralgia, snake and centipede bileS, post-panum haematomctra, fever, Dphthalmia and hepatD-biliary diseases. The usual daily dDse is 8 to. 16g Df dried plant in the fDrm Df a d
ecoctiDn, Dr 20 to 40g Df fresh plant in the fDrm Df a salted juice administered by mDuth; the residue is applied topically. The species Phyllanthus niruri is also useful. 287 
J i I 144 Piper belle L. Piperaceae Local names: Trfm khling. !du cay.!du luung. thO lau clfutg. mjftu (TlIy), lau (Dao). English names: Betel leaf vine, betel leaf pepper, betel pepper. Descriprion : A slender creeper with adventitious roots. Stems glabrous, sulcate, thickened at the nodes. Leaves alternate, heart-shaped, palmately nerved, glabrous and shining on both sides. Inflorescence in drooping, dense axillary spike, consisting of male and female flowers. Berry globose, hairy at the apex (rarely produced). All parts of the plant have a special aroma. Flowering period: May -August. DistribUlion : Cultivated in many areas, especially in the South. for its leaves, which are chewed. Parts used: Leaves and fOOts, collected throughout 
the year, are used fresh. Chemical composirion : The whole plant yields an essential oil containing eugenol, carvacrol, chavicol, allyl catechol, chavibetol, cineol, estragole, methyl eugenol, p-cymene, caryophyllene and cadinene; tannins; sugars; carotene, thiamine, riboflavine, nicotinic acid, vilamin C and amino acids. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves possess antibacterial properties and are beneficial in the treatment of purulent parodontosis in the form of a collutory made of the juice or extract A poultice of the leaves and a wash with the decoction are used in treating wounds, burns, impetigo, furunculosis, eczema and lymphangitis. The leaves if topically applied to the chest cure cough and asthma, and if applied to the breast arrest laclation. Friction of the spinal column with the leaves is recommended for treating colds. The roots (8 to 12g) are used in treating rheumatism. 289 
r I L 145 Piper Iolot C. DC. Local names : LA 16t. tAt b3t, bAu pat, ph,iac pat (Thy). English name : Lolot pepper. Piperaceae Description : Pttennial creeper. Stems swollen at the nodes, downy while young, 30 -4Ocm. high. Leaves alternate, broadly cordate, arnplexicaully petioled, glabrous above, downy on the nerves beneath ; margins wavy. lnflorescence in erect axillary spike of unisexual flowers. Berry single-seeded. Flowering period: August -October. Distriblllion : FOtDld wild in damp forests, along stream banks. Parts used: TIle whole plant, preferably in flower, can be harvested in summer and aurumn, washed and then dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains an essential oil. TherapeUJic uses : The entire plant possesses anti-inflammatory and anodyne properties. It is utilized in the treabnent of rheumatism, ostealgia, lumbago, headache, paresis, hyperhidrosis of the extremities, dyspepsia, vomiting, flarulence, colic, diarrhoea, toothache, chronic catarrhal rhinitis and oedema. It is used in combination with other plants for treating mushroom poisoning and snake-bite. The daily dose is 810 12g of dried or 20 to 30g of fresh plant, in the form of a decoction. It is administered perlingually for toothache. 291 
I 146 Piper nigrum L. Piperaceae Local names: He, tieu, hilt tieu, loi (Thy). English names : Black pepper, common pepper, white pepper. Description: Climbing perennial plant Stems glabrous, rooting at the nodes. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, rounded at the base : apex pointed : recurved nerves prominent beneath. Inflorescence in drooping spike of dioecious flowers, opposite to and shorter than the leaf. Berry globular, red when ripe, turning black after drying, 3 -4 
mm. in diameter, strongly scented and bitter to the taste. Flowering period: May -August. DistribuJwn : Extensively cultivated in the southern pan of Viet Narn. Parts used: The picked when fully ripe, is dried in the sun or in ovens. After drying, the pericarp may be removed tieu SQ). Chemical composition : The seeds contain alkaloids : piperine, piperetine, chavicinc and an essential oil, consisting of terpene, pheJlandrcnc, caryophyJlene, piperonal-dihydrocarvcol and caryophyllcne oxide. TherapeuJic uses: The berries, well known for their stomachic, anodyne and antibacterial properties, are prescribed for treating dyspepsia, vomiting, diarrhoea and colic resulting from cold, The average daily dose is I to 3g in the form of a decoction, powder or pills. The powdered berries, applied IOpiciUly, cure toothache. They can also be used as an insecticide against clothes moths. 293 
147 Plantago major L. Plantaginaceae Local names : Ma (lA, xa su rna (Thy), nh8 en dlit ("\"Mi), nt,g chAy mfa (Dao). English names : Broad·leaved plantain, ripple grass, cart-track plant, greater plantain. Description: Perennial herb with rootstock wholly underground. Leaves radical, spoon-shaped, 3-nerved, entire or distantly toothed ; petioles long, tightly clasping each other at the base. Flowers small, in long, slender and axiUary spike. Capsule ovoid. Seeds numerous, duU-brown. Flqwering period: May -August. DistribUlion : Grows wild in wet places and is also found under cultivation. Parts used: The whole plant, except for the roots ; it can be harvested aU the year round, especially in July and August. The well-washed plant can be used fresh or dried. Chemical composition: The leaves contain aucubin, olcanolic acid, mucilage, tannin, saponins, essential oil, vilamins A, C and K, citric acid, planteose and potassium salts. TherapeUlic uses: The whole plant and seeds, well known for their diuretic activity, produce a salutary effect in the treatment of oedema, dysuria, haecnaturia, urinary lithiasis, j,.:,rsistent cough, bronchitis and ophthalmia in a daily dose of 8 to 16g in the form of a decoction or extract. A poultice of the fresh leaves and a plaster made of an extract of the whole plant are useful for treating burns and furunculosis. The seeds are useful for treating diarrhoea and dysentery. 295 
, 148 PlatycodoD 
grandinorum (Jacq.) A. DC. Campanulaceae Local names : Oil clinh. Ie& clinh. English names: Chinese bellflower. Japanese bellflower. Description: An erect perennial herbaceous plant. 50· 9Ocm. in height. with IlJberous roots. Leaves opposite or 3-verticillate. the upper alternate; margins toothed. Howers blue, lilac or white, solitary or in a terminal cluster. Capsule ovoid ; seeds numerous, minute, blaclc:ish-brown. Flowering period: June -September. DistribUJion: An introduced species, naturalized in the mountains and in the plains. ParIs used: The rOOlS, dug up in autumn. winter or spring. after the periderm has been scraped off are well washed. wrapped up for 12 hours, then cut up into thin slices and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : The roots contain triterpcnoid saponins of the olean group: lcilcyosaponin (yields lc:iIcyosapogenin and galactose on hydrolysis), platycodigenic acid, platycodigenin, polygalasic acid, phytosterols and inulin. TherapeUJic uses : The roots, well known for their antillJssive and expectorant propenies, are used for the relief of cough with fetid phlegm, sore throat. hoarseness, chest pain, asthma. haemoptysis and dysentery. The usual daily dose is 4 to 8g in the form of a decoction, liquid extract or syrup, used on their own or in combination with Glycyrrhiza. A powdered mixture with Illicium verum is topically applied for periodontosis and halitosis. 297 
149 P1uchta 
indica (L.) Less. Compositae Local names: Cole tan. cay hie. til bi. pha (Tay). Description : Slender shrub. 1 . 
2m. tall. Branches pubescent and then glabrous. Leaves alternate, subsessilc, glaucous-green on both sides ; margins serrate. Innorcscence in tenninal corymb of many heads; nowers lilac. Fruit small, angular. All parts of the plant are softly pubescent and scented. Flowering period: February, April. Distribution: Grows wild in marshes or but is usually cultivated for quickset hedges. Parts 'used : RoolS and leaves, collected all the year round. are well washed and used fresh or dried .. , Chemical composition: The leaves contain proteins 2.9%. The whole plant contains chlorogenic acid and an essential oil. Therapeutic uses: The roolS, which possess antifebrile, demulcent and anodyne properties. are recommended for treating adiaphoretic fever. headache. rheumatism. lumbago. osteodynia, sprain, dysentery and dyspepsia_ The average daily dose is 8 to 16g in the Conn of a decoction. A decoction of the fresh leaves is used in an inhalation for cold and a 
wash for scabies, while a mixture with alcohol is applied topically as an anodyne. The powdered leaves mixed with beeswax and castor oil are used in bandaging closed fractures. 299 
l ISO Plumeria rubra L. var. acutifolia (Poir.) Apocynaceae Bailey Local names: &.J.i, bOng Stf, Stf cUi, hoa Chiim pa, mian chi nr. English names : Temple tree, pagoda tree, frangipani plant. Description: Medium-sized tree, 5 -
6m. high. Branches neshy, brittle. Leaves alternate, usually crowded in thick tenninal cluster, entire and attenuate at both ends. Innorescence in tenninaJ cyme; nowers white with a yellow centre, or reddish-pink, fragrant. Follicles divaricate, with numerous winged seeds. All parts of the plant yield a milky latex. Flowering period: May -August. Distribution: Cultivated for ornament, particularly in the vicinity of religious shrines and burial grounds. Parts used: Bark, latex and nowers. The bark and latex arc collected all the year round. Rowers are picked at the beginning of the nowering period. Bark and nowers are used fresh or dried. Chemical composition .' The stem-baric contains plumierides and fulvoplumierin. TherapeUlic uses: The nowersarc used in treating cough, constipation, acute enteritis, dysentery and haemophilia, in a daily dose of 6 to 12g in the fonn of a decoction. A decoction of the stem-baric is administered by mouth in a daily dose of 4 to 8g for hydropsi .. and 8 to 16g as a purgative; an alcoholic maceration in a dose of 12 to 20g is used as a gargle to cure paradontosis. The latex is used in the same way as the stem-baric, but in lower doses. The plant is proscribed for pregnant women. 301 
151 Pogostemon cablin (Blanco) Bentham Labiatae Local name : Ho& hU'O'l1g. English names : Patchouli, patchouli oil plant Description: Perennial herb, 3().{5(} em. high. Stems quadrangular, woody at the base, violet-brown. Leaves opposite, coarsely double-toothed. Inflorescence in axillary or tennina\ spike of contiguous whorls; flowers pale purple (rarely produced). Fruit of 4 hard nullets. The whole plant is clothed with soft hairs and is strongly scented-Flowering period: May -June. DistribUlion : Cultivated in gardens as a medicinal plant Ports used: TIle whole plant, except for the roots. Plants are harvested before flowering, washed and dried in the sun or in ovens at. a low temperature. ChLmjcal composition : The whole plant yields an essential oil consisting of benzaldehyde, eugenol, cinnarnic anhydride patchoulene, Ct -guaiene, Ct -bulnesene, Ct -terpinenc, cadinene, patchouli alcohol. ThLrapeUlic uses: Except for the roots, the entire plant has antibacterial and demulcent properties. It is used in treating colic, diarrhoea, coryza, vomiting, eructation, halitosis, body pains, influenza, fever, headache, cough and dyspepsia. It is used in a daily dose of 6 to 12g in the fonn of a powder, infusion or decoction. 303 
152 Polygonatum kingianum CoIL et Hemsl. Liliaceae Local names: HoAng tinh hoa (\0, hOOng tinh ]A mQC vang, cu com Description : Perennial herbaceous plant, 1 Ł 1.2m. high. Rootstock horizontal, stout, whitish, strangled at the nodes. Leaves slalkless, narrow, 5·IO-verticillate with a long, sharp and curling tip. Rowers red, in pairs, drooping in the axils. Berry oval, violet·blue when ripe. , Flowering period: March· May. DistribUlion : Found wild in the highlands above 12oom. Parts used: The rhizomes, collected in autumn, are well washed, steam·cooked. then dried in the sun or in ovens. Before use, they are boiled with molasses then dried. This process is repeated 9 times. Chemical composition : The rhizomes conlain mucilage, slarCh and sugars. TherapeUlic uses : The rhizome is considered as a tonic and has a beneficial effect in the treatment of pulmonary diseases, dry cough and heamoptysis. It relieves general debility, lumbago and rheumatic pains. It is available in the form of a powder, decoction or alcoholic maceration. The usual dose is 12 to 20g per day. 305 
L 153 Polygonum chinense L. Polygonaceae Local names : ThOrn 10m, Iii 10m, du6i tlim, mm b<;m, x5m cung (IMi), nu mC (Thy), ca d6(K'ho). English name: Chinese Irnotweed. Description: Undershrub about 1m. high. Stems cylindrical, glabrous, much-branched. Leaves alternate, ovoid, entire, with a tubular ocrea and sometimes a black marking like a "Y" on the upper face. Innarescence in terminal panicled cyme; flowers small, white or pink. Nutlet trigonous, pulpy, dull-black when ripe. Flowering period : August -November. Distributwn : Grows wild everywhere. Parts used: The leaves, harvested aU the year round and used fresh. Chemical compon/wn: The whole plant contains rubin, rheum-emodin, oxy-methyl-anthraquinone, anthraquinone, glucosides, myricyl alcohol. Therapeutic uses : The leaves have antibacterial properties and are effective in the treatment of furunculosis, impetigo, ulceration of the helix, scalp scabs, cold sore, eczema, and streptococcal skin infections. Poultices made of pounded fresh leaves, their juice or their concentrated extract are IOpically applied. A decoction of dried leaves is indicated for boils· and dysentery. Snake-bite is treated by oral administration of the juice of fresh leaves (20 -30g), the residue being applied to the bite as a plaster. 307 
154 Polygonum multinorum Thunb. Polygonaceae Local names: Ha thu 0 c1O, giao c1!ng, rna On, khua Dnh (Thai), m§n nang 6n (Thy), Ii sf (Dao). English name: Many-nowered knotweed. Description: Perennial climber. Stems twining, branchlets and petioles violet-purple. Roots tuberous, brownish-red. Leaves alternate, ovate-cordate ; apex pointed ; ocrea thin, meinbranous. Inflorescence in axillary panicle ; flowers small, white. Nutlet 3-angled, winged. Flowering period: September -November. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the highlands; occasionally cultivated. Parts used: The ruberous roots, 
eoDected in aurumn, are weD washed, cut into pieces, steam-cooked and dried in the sun or in ovens. Before use, they are boiled with a decoction of Vigno cylindrica until they go black, then cut into slices and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : The ruberous roots contain rhaponticin (rhapontin,. ponticin), chrysophanic acid, emodin, physcion, rhein and polygonic acid. Therapelllic uses: The root is a blood tonic and anti-inflammatory. It is effective in the therapy of renal and hepatic hypofunction, neurasthenia, dyspepsia, insomnia, hypogalactia, rheumatism, lumbago, spermatorrhoea, leucorrhoea, haematuria, bloody stools, prurigo and anaemia. Long-term administration has a rejuvenating effect arid makes white hair grow black again. The daily dose is 12 to 20g in the form of a decoction or elixir. 309 
L 155 Portulaca oleracea L. Portulacaceae Local names: Rau sam. rnA xi hi9n, phjac bia, sl6m d English names : Garden purslane, common purslane, flowered purslane, kitchen-garden purslane. Description: ProSlI1!te annual herb. Stems succulent, green or reddish. Leaves alternate, fleshy, shining glabrous; base attenuate, apex truneate ; nerves inconspicuous. Howers bright yellow in terminal cluster, without stalks. Capsule globose or ovoid, opening II1!nsversely ; seeds numerous, shining black. Flowering period: June -August. DislribuJion : Commonly found wild in wet places. Parts used: The whole except (or the roots, is gathered in summer and aurumn and used fresh. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains carotene, vitamins C, Bt, B2, PP ; Ca, Mg, Na, K salts ; organic acids: nicotinic and oxalic; noradrenalin, and the biflavonoid Iiquiritin. TherapeuJic uses: Except for the roots, the e
ntire plant is used as an antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and anthelminthic. It is used in treating bacillary dysentery and dysuria, in a dose of250g of fresh plant in the form of a decoction. A combination with equal parts of Euphorbia thymi/olia is also used. The juice eXlI1!cted from lOOg of pounded fresh plant and diluted with water serves as an anthelminthic against oxyuriasis and ascariasis. It is administered in the morning, for 3 -5 days. Poultices of fresh l
eaves are used to treat mastitis, boils and impetigo. 311 
Ł 156 Premna integrifolia Roxb. Local names: VQng each. cay cach, each nui. English name: Headache tree. Verbenaceae Description : Medium-sized ·tree, 5 -
7m. high. Young twigs quadrangular, large branches sometimes thorny. Leaves opposite, entire or minutely dentate in the upper part, shining glabrous above, pale beneath. Inflorescence in terminal corymb ; flowers greenish-white. Drupe globose or ovoid, black. Flowering period: May -AugusL Distribuiion : Cultivated as an ornamental and shade tree. Paris used: The leaves and roots, gathered all the year round, are well washed and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition.: The stem-bark contains the aIkaIoids premnine and graniarine. The roots yield an essential oil. TherapiuJic uses: The leaves and the roots are used in treating fever, colic, diarrhoea, dysentery, urine retention, flatulence, dyspepsia and rheumatism and also as a galactagogue and diuretic. The usual daily dose is 30 to 50g of fresh leaves in the form of a juice extract or 10 to 15g of dried leaves or roots in the form of a decoction. 313 
L 151 Prunella vulgaris L. Labiatae Local name: HI) khO tMo. English names: Sicklewort, black man, carpenter's herb, all-heal, pimpernel, bruneI, common self-heal, carpenter grass. sickle-heal. Description : Biennial or perennial herb 20 -3Ocm. high. Stems quadrangular, pubescent, reddish-violet Leaves opposite, entire or slightly toothed. Inflorescence in terminal spike of numerous whorls; flowers of two kinds, the small female, the bigger bisexual, pale violet. Fruit of 4 hard nutlets. Flowering period: April -June. DistribUlion : Grows wild in wet soil ncar small streams in the mountains. Parts used: The whole plant, except for the roots, is gathered during the flowering period, 
washed and lightly dried in the sun or in ovens at a low temperature. Chemical composition: The whole plam yields D. fenchone and ursolic acid. Therapeutic uses: The aerial parts have antibacterial propenies and are beneficial in the treatment of mastitis, scrofula, goitre, ophthalmalgia, metritis, hypertension, neurodermatitis, hepatitis, furunculosis, impetigo, eczema, oliguria and leucorrhoea. The average dose is 8 to 16g per day in the form of a decoction. Poultices of the pounded fresh plant arc used to help wounds to heal. 315 
158 PrUDUS persica (L.) BaISCh Rosaceae Local names : Boo, pilling (TIIy), co tao, ken rna cai (Thai), lciAo (Dao). English name : Peach tree. Description: Small to medium-sized tree, 3 -4m. high. Bark brown, branches glabrous. Leaves alternate,attenuate at both ends; margins serrate. Flowers pink, solirary in the axil of the leaves. Drupe subglobose, downy, with a lateral furrow and whitish-yellow skin overlaid with red ; slone ridged, brown. Flowering period: January -March. DisrribuJion : Widely cultivated in the highlands for its edible fruit Parts used: Kernels of stones, leaves. The fruit is picked in autumn. The stones are taken out of the fruit and cracked to obtain the kernels, which are dried in the sun or in ovens. The leaves are gathered all the year round and used fresh. Chemical composition: The fruit contains ascorbic, citric and oxalic acids, vitamin A and thiamine. The seeds are rich in fatty oil, amygdalin. The leaves contain quercitrin, kaempferol, caffeic acid and p-coumaric acid. TherapeuJic uses: The seed kernels have a salurary effect in the relief of cough, menstrual haematometta, ecchymosis, contusions and post-partum haemorrhage, in a daily dose of 6 to 12g in decoction form. A poultice made of pounded fresh leaves and a leaf decoction used as a wash are prescribed for the healing of scabies, prurigo and impetigo. The flowers are diuretic and laxative in a daily dose of 3 to 5g in the form of a decoction or infusion. The drug must not be given to pregnant women. Caution must be exercised in the use 
of the leaves, which are highly toxic. 317 
159 Pueraria thomsonii Benth. Leguminosae Local names: SID! day, khau cat (Thy), keo (Thai). English names: Kudzu vine, kudzu bean . . Description : Perennial twiner, reaching a length of 10m. Roots tuberous, thick and long. Leaves alternate, trifoliate ; leaflets entire or lobed, the terminal larger. Inflorescence in lax axillary raceme; flowers violet-blue, fragrant Pod constricted between the seeds and densely clothed with silky hairs. Flowering period: September -October. Distribution: Widely cultivated in many parts of Viet Nam. Parts used: TIle bJberous roots, dug up in winter and spring, are well washed, sliced, subjected to sulfur fumigation and dried in the sun or in ovens. A flour can be made from the tubers. Chemical composition : The tuberous roolS contain isoflavoncs : puerarin, daidzein, daidzin; and starch. The leaves are rich in amino acids; asparagine; adenine. TherapeUlic uses : The tuberous roots have marked antipyretic properties and are useful in treating fever, influenza, headache and also furunculosis. They are usually prescribed in the form of a decoction in doses of 5 to 109 per day. An aqueous s
ugared solution of the root flour is used orally as a refresher. In case of snake-bite the juice of crushed fresh leaves is administered orally and the residue is applied topically to the bite. 
319 
r I 160 Ponica granatum L. Local names: L"",. an th'!Ch I"",. m:lc fiu (Thy). English name: Pomegranate. Punicaceae Description: Small plant. 2 
-3m. high. Baric smooth. greyish. Leaves oblong. opposite or alternate. occasionally in tuft. shan-petioled. Flowers bright red at the end of branches. Fruit globose. 5 -
8cm. in diameter. crowned by persistent calyx. with yellow rind spotted with brownish-red. Seeds numerous. covered by edible pulp. Flowering period: April -May. DistribUlion : Cultivated for its for ornament and as a medicinal plant Ports used: Root-bark (collected in autumn). fruit rind (collected in May and June). Thc root-bark is dried before use. Fruit rind may be employed fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The root-bark and stem-bark contain the alkaloids pelletierine. isopelletierine. pseudopellctierine and methyl-peIIetierine. The periearp yields tannins. The juice of fruit is rich in citric and malic acids. glucose. fructose and mallOse. TherapeUlic uses : The root-baric and stem-bark are employed in the therapy of taeniasis. in a daily dose of 20 to 50g of dried root-bark or stem-baric in the form of a decoction. orO.3Og of pelletierine combined with OAOg of tannin. divided into 3 subdoses. The fruit rind is effective for dysentery and diarrhoea. in a dose of 1510 20g per day. in decoction f
orm. The drug is highly toxic and SO must be used with extreme caution. It must not be administered 10 pregnant women or children. 321 
r , I 161 Quisqualis indica L. Combretaceae Local names: Sir qulin. qua giun, day giun, qua naco mac giao giun, Illng cWng (T3y). English names: Rangoon creeper, Chinese honeysuckle. Description : Scandent woody shrub, much-branched, spreading. Leaves opposile, papyraceous, round or ovate at the base ; apex pointed. Innorescence in dense axillary and lenninal spike ; nowers with long corolla-tube, while, turning red later on, fragrant. Fruit rhomboidal, 5-angled, dark brown. Flowering period: March -June. Distribution : Grows wild in the mountains and is cultivated as an ornamental plant Parts used : Kernels. The ripe fruit can be picked in August and Seplember, dried and crushed to free the kernels. Chemical composition : The kernels contain a fatty oil consisting of myristic, palmitic, stearic, oleic and linoleic acids ; potassium salt of quisqualic acid; trigonelline, and phytoslerols. The nowers yield cyanidin monoglucoside. Therapeutic uses : The fruit kernel is used as an anthelminthic, especially for ascariasis. It is stripped of its envelope to eliminate its vomitive properties and prescribed in a dose of 10 to 20g per day for adults and 4 to 8g a day for children, depending on their age, in powder fonn. Three hours laler, a salt purgative is given. The root is effective in treating rheumatism, in a daily dose of 12to 20g in decoction fonn. A concentrated decoction of crushed fruit used as a gargle is active against toothache. 323 
162 Rauvolfia cambodiana Pierre ex Pitard Apocynaceae Local names : Ba !!,!C, ba Sl!C L1 to, he' rac, Ita day (Ba Na). English name : Cambodian rauvolfl3. Description: Erect evergreen undershrub, 0.5 -l.5m. high. SiemS ereel, lenticellale. Leaves in whorl of three, atlenuale at both ends ; dade green above, pale below ; margins entire. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal cyme with long stalk ; flowers while, pinkish outside. Drupe obliquely ovoid, blackish-violet when ripe. All parts of the plant yield a milky juice. Flowering period: Almost the whole year round. Disrributwn : Grows wild; endemic in the mountains of the southern region. Parts used: The roOt-bark, collected aU the year round, especially in autumn and winter. The roots are well washed and the bark stripped off and dried in the sun or in ovens. Care is taken to keep the periderm of the bark intact when the roots are being dug up. Chemical composition: The root-bark contains 2.64% alkaloids, mostly reserpine and ajmaline. In addition serpentine, reserpinine, ajmalicine and rauvomitine are found in R.vomitoria and canescine in R. canescens. Therapeutic uses: The root-bark, which possesses hypolensive and sedative properties, is widely used for the treatment of hypertension and psychoses. It. is prescribed in the form of a 1.5% tincture or tablets containing 2mg total alkaloid. The oral dose is len to twenty drops of tincture or I tablet, 2 to 3 times per day for 2 to 4 weeks. A new course of treatment is instituted after a pause of 2 to 4 weeks. It serves also as raw material for the extraction of reserpine and ajmaline. 325 
, 163 Rebmannia glutinosa (Gaertner) Liboscb. Local names : Sinh dja, 
dja hoang. Scrophulariaceae Description : Perennial herb with tuberous roots, 20 Ł 3Ocm. high, usually withered in the dry season. Leaves oval. base oblong, apex round, irregularly crenate·toothed, radiating in rosette; nerves reticulately veined. Flowers wbular, reddish-violet in long raceme. Capsule many-seeded. The whole plant is covered with soft hairs. Flowering period: April -July. DistribUlion: An introduced species in many parts of the country. Parts used: The wherous roots, collected when the plants are 7 -8 months old, are well washed and dried in the sun or in ovens. They are used as they are or processed into dja". Chemical composition: The wberous roots contain glucose, mannite, the glucoside rehmanin and carotene. TherapeUlic uses : The tuberous root possesses reconstituent, antianaemic and diuretic properties. It is used in treating general debility, anaemia, epistaxis, polymenorrhoea, threatened abonion, internal haemorrhage, chronic nephritis, sore throat, erythema and dysentery. It is also prescribed as a depurative, cardiac tonic and soporific. The daily dose is 8 to I6g in the form of a decoction or extract 327 
I l 164 Rhodomyrtus tomentosa (Ai!.) Hassk. Myrtaceae Local names: Sim. hbng sim. duung Ie. <lAo kim nuung. CO nim (ThAi). m&: nim (Thy). English names: Tomentose rose myrtle. downy rose myrtle. hill gooseberry. hill guava. Description: Small shrub. 1 -3m. in height, much-branched. Young shoots angular. tomentose. Branchescylindrical.glabrous. Leaves opposite. oblong-ovate. thick. base 3-nerved. villous beneath. Flowers axillary. rose-pink. solitary or fascicled. Berry dark-violet when ripe. edible. Seeds numerous. small. Flowering period: April-June. Disrribution : Grows wild on the lower slopes of hills. ParIS used: Young shoots. leaves. flower-buds. ripe fruit. The leaves are harvested all the year round. The shoots are collected in spring. the flowers and fruit in summer. They are all dried before use. Chemica/ composition : The whole plant contains tannin. The fruit yields proteins. fatty substances. hydrocarbons. vitamin "A. thiamine. riboflavin and nicotinic acid. Therapeutic uses: The buds and young leaves have a beneficial effect in colic. diarrhoea, dysentery. abscesses. furunculosis and haemorrhage. The daily dose is 10 to 30g of fresh buds or young leaves in the form of an extracted juice or dried for use as a powder or in a decoction. The concentrated decoction of leaves is used as an antiseptic wash for wounds. impetigo and abscesses. A combination of the ripe fruit and Caesa/pima sappan is also prescribed. 329 
, 165 Ricinus communis L. Euphorblaceae Local names: TIillu dau. tY rna. du du lia. co hung hom (Thai). slung deng (Thy). puling sf (Dao). English names: Castor oil plant. castor-bean tree. palma christi. Description: Glabrous plant. I -Sm. in height. Stems hollow. Leaves alternate. long-petioled. palmately lobed. serrate. green or reddish. Twigs and young leaves clothed with white dust Inflorescence in terminal cymose raceme; flowers small. monoecious. the male below. the female above. Capsule eovered with soft spines. hi-valved'; seeds ovoid. slightly compressed. shining brown with dark coloured spots. Flowering period: May -August. DistribuJion : Cultivated. mainly on sandy soils. Parts used: Seeds. The ripe fruit is picked in April and May. Chemical composition: The seeds are rich in fauy oil. consisting of glycerides, especially ricinolein. which yields ricinoleic acid on hydrolysis. the toxalburnin. ricin. and the alkaloid. ricinine. TherapeuJic uses: The seed oil is effective as a laxative in a dose of 2 to Sml, and as a purgative in a dose of20 to 30mi. The pounded seeds applied as a poUltice to the paretic part have a salutary effect in facial paresis. The crushed seeds (IS seeds) or leaves of purple Ricinus are locally applied to the plantar surface of the feet for the induction oflabour at term and placenta delivery in cases of dystocia and placenta retention. After the delivery of the foetus and placenta. the parturient's feet are thoroughly washed. 331 
, I I L 166 Rosa Iaevigata Michaux Local names: Kim anh. thfch Ie nr. mk nam coi (fay). English name: Cherokee rose. Rosaceae Description: Small vigorous shrub with thick hooked prickles. Leaves trifoliate. toothed ; stipule at the base of petiole. Flowers large. white. solitary and tenninal. odourless. Fruit ovoid. clothed with thin. s
harp spines and crowned by the persistent calyx. brownish-yellow when ripe. Seeds numerous. compressed. Flowering period: March -June. DistribUJion : Wild species. indigenous to Cao and 4ng S01l provinces; also cultivated as a hedge-plant Paris used: Fruit, picked in autumn. After all the thorns have been scraped off. the fruit is halved and stripped of all !he seeds and white inside hairs. then dried in the sun or in dryers. Chemical composition: The fruit contains citric and malic acids. tannin. vitamin C. glucosides. saponins. TherapeUJic uses : The fruit is regarded as a general tonic and is successfully employed in spennatorrhoea, leucorrhoea. enteritis. pollakiuria and neurasthenia. It is also used as a haemostatic.1t is prescribed in !he fonn of a decoction. extract. powder or candied fruit in an oral dose of 4 to 12g per day. 333 
167 Rumex cbineDsis Cam pd. Polygonaceae Local names: Chllt chit. hrai bO, dU"O'Ilg de, tho <lja hoang, m
ac say (Hy), phAc cat ngan (Thai). English name: Chinese dock. Description: Erect herb, 30 . 5Ocm. high, with brown tuberous rooLS. Stems deeply grooved. Leaves alternate, margins wavy, the lower broad and long·stalked, the upper narrow, subsessile. Inflorescence in terminal whorled cyme; flowers greenish·yellow. Small nut acutely trigonous, enclosed in persistent and thickened calyx. Flowering period: March Ł April. Distributwn: Grows wild in abandoned fields and on river banks. Parts used: ROOLS and leaves, The rooLS are collected all the year round, but preferably in autwnn and winter. After the radicles have been stripped off, the roots are well washed, sliced and dried in the sun or in ovens. The leaves are harvested in spring and summer. They are used fresh externally and dried internally. Chemical composition: The rooLS and leaves contain anthraglucosides 3' 3.4%,of which the free form 0.47%, thecombincd form 2.54%; tannin; resins. Therapeutic uses: The rooLS are prescribed as a laxative to cure constipation in a dose of Ito 3g per day in the form of a powder or decoction, and as a purgative in a dose of4to 109. External application is effective for contusions, inflammation, acne, eczema, prurigo, scalp scabies and vulvitis: a maceration in vinegar or alcohol of fresh rooLS or leaves is prescribed for external use. 335 
168 Sauropus androgynus (L.) Merr. Eopborbiaceae Local names: Rau ng6t, b6 ng6t, chum ngQt, thfm, ph&: b6n (TAy), phic 6t (Thai). Description: Evergreen plant, 0.8· l.5m. high, much-branched. Stems cylindrical, entirely glabrous. Leaves alternate, ovate, base round, apex pointed; petiole very shon. Stipule small. Flowers greenish-yellow, male and female on the same planL Capsule globose, white, dehiscent into 3 
valves when ripe. Flowering period: September -November. DistribUlion : Cultivated everywhere as a vegetable. Parts used: The leaves and roots from plants over 2 ycarsold. The roots are dried before use ; the leaves are used fresh. Chemical composition : The leaves contain amino acids : lysine, methionine, tryptophane, phenylalanine, threonine, valine, leucine, isoleucine; nicotinic acid. vitamin C a
nd carotene. TherapeUlic uses: The fresh leaves or rOOlS possess uterotonic activity and are used for the treatment of retained placenta in a dose of 40g, in the form of an extracted juice administered in 2 s
ubdoses at 10 minutes interval. A mouth-wash made of the j
uice of fresh leaves and honey and applied to the tongue and gums cures thrush of the tongue in infants. The leaves are effective for erythema, measles and dysuria. The roots serve as a diuretic and relieve congestion. 337 
169 Schemera octophyUa (Lour.) Harms Araliaccae Local names: Ngil gia bl chan chim. cay <lang, III lAng, tang (Thy), co I3D (ThAi), xi to-r6t (K'ho), loong veng vuong (Ba Na). English name : Octophyllous aralia Description : Tree 10m. high. Leaves pabnate with 6 -8 leaflets, alternate, lower part of long petiole surrounding the stem. Trunk bark and leaves smell sweet when crushed. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal raceme of umbels ; flowers small, greenish or while. Berry globose, darIc-violet when ripe. Flowering period: February -March. DistribUlion : Grows wild in secondary forest in mountainous regions. ParIS used: Root-bark and stem-bark, collected in autumn. The bark is wrapped up for 2A -48 hours to develop the aroma, then dried in the s
hade. Chemical C07T!{JOSilion : The root-bark and Slem-bark contain triterpenoid saponins that yield oleanolic acid on hydrolysis. TherapeUlic uses : The root-bark and Slem-bark possess tonic, anti-inflammatory and diuretic properties and are used in treating rheumatism, lumbago, osteodynia, paresis, amnesia, vulval pruritis, impotence, dyspepsia, infantile rickets, oedema, dysuria and impetigo. The usual daily dose is 10 to 20g of Slem-bark or 6 to 12g of TOOt-bark in the form of a decoction or elixir. 339 
170 Scoparia dulcis L. Scrophulariaceae Local names : Cam th30 dA!, cam th30 nam, da cam th3o, da kham (Tay), l'rOOt I'!y (K'bo). 'English names : Sweet broom, toothbrush. Description: Annual herbaceoos plan!, 40 -7Ocm. high. Stems woody al the base, much-branched, quadrangular when young. Leaves small, 3-veniciUate or opposite, coarsely toothed-serrate. Flowers while, crowded in the axil of the leaves. Capsule small, globose, many-seeded. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlion : Common as a wild planl in abandoned fields, on roadsides and on river banks, ParIS used: The whole plan\, including the roots, can be harvested all the year round, bul preferably in spring and summer. !tis used fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The roots contain alkaloids and a bilter substance, amellin. TherapeUlic uses : The entire plan\, including the roots, possesses anti-inflammatory, antifebrile and diuretic properties. II is used in treating coryza, hyperthermia, sore throat, cough, erythema, measles, boils, impeligo, manioc and other poisoning and menorrhagia. The usual dose is 8 10 12g of dried or 20 to 40g of fresh planl per day, in the form of a decoction. The fresh plant is especially active againsl dry cough. 341 
171 Scrophularia ningpoensis Hemsl . Scrophulariaceae Local names : Huyen sAm, Me sAm, nguyen sAm. English name : Ning·po ligwort. Description : Herbaceous plant, 1.5 -2m. tall. Stems quadrangular, greenish, grooved. Leaves opposite. pointed at the apex; margins toothed. Inflorescence in short axiUary and terminal raceme ; flowers brownish-yellow. Fruit and seeds black. Flowering period: June -October. DislribUlion : An introduced species. naturalized and widespread in the mountains. midlands and plains. ParIs used: The roots. collected in autumn. are well washed and wrapped up for 5 -
10 days. until the inside goes black. Chemical composition : The roots contain scrophularin. asparagine, phytosterols. an essential oil. fatty acids and sugars. uses : The root possesses antifebrile. antibacterial and anti-inflammatory properties. It is utilized in the treatmentof evening fcver, erythema. mouth dryness. constipation. prurigo, furunculosis. sorc throat, ulcerous stomatitis and tonsillitis. The usual dose is 6to I2g per day in the form of a decoction or piUs. 343 
172 Siegesbeckia orientaJis L. Compositae Local names : Hy thiem, co dr, cO b8 a. cM de hoa vMg. cUt Iqn, nlui khi cay (TIIy), co bOOng bo (Thai). English name: Common SL Paul's wort. Description : Annual herbaceous plant, 30 Ł 6Ocm. high. Stems and twigs hairy. Leaves opposite. rbombifonn or trianguiar-ovate, 3-nerved at the base, coarsely denticulate. Flowers in yellow head, axillary or tenninal bracts with viscous glandular hairs. Achene ovoid, glabrous, black. Flowering period : March -October. DiS/TibuJwn : Grows wild in mounlainous regions, usually in wet and shady places. ParIs used: The whole plant, except the roots, collected before flowering, is lightly dried in the sun or in dryers at low temperature. Chemical composition: The whole plant contains bitter substances, an essential oil.darutin, diterpene. TherapeuJic uses : The entire plant, except for the roots, possesses anti-inflammatory properties. It has a benefICial effect in rheumatism. hemiparesis, artlualgia, ostealgia, lumbago, funmculosis, impetigo, menslruai disorders and snake-bite. It is administered in a dose of 10 to 15g daily in the fonn of a decoction, liquid extract, powder or pills. The external application of pounded fresh leaves in a poultice is effective in treating funmculosis, impetigo, bee-sting and snake-bite. 345 
173 Smilax glabra Roxb. Liliaccae Local names : 1116 phl!C linh, khUc kll&:, khau <Iilu d'''!ng 10 (ChAu to pOt (K'ho), lai (K'dong). mQt hoi dOi (Oao). Description : Unarmed climbing plant, 4 ·5m. long. Tuberous roolS nodose. Leaves alternate, oval, apex pointed, 3-nerved ; tendrils present on the petiole. Inllorescence in axillary single umbel ; flower.; small, greenish-yellow; flower-stalk longer than the umbel-stalk. Berry globose, nearly uigonal, black when ripe. Flowering period: May -July. Distributwn : Grows wild in the mountains and midlands. ParIS used: Tuberous roolS, dug up all the year round, but preferably in summer_ They are dried before use. Chemical composition : The tuberous roolS contain stigmasterol and saponins. Therapeutic uses : The root is demulcent, antiallergic, diuretic, diaphoretic and depurative. It is used in treating impetigo. furunculosis, phlegmon, psoriasis. dyshidrosis, mercurialism, rheumatism and osteodynia. The daily dose is 15 10 30g in the fonn of a decoction, liquid extract, powder or piUs. 347 
Ł 174 Solanum hainanense Hance Solanaceae Local names: ca gai leo, cA gai day, cA q"'1Dh, cA coo nan (TIIy), b'rongoon (Ea Na). Description: Procumbent prickly shrub. Leaves alternate, irregularly lobed, prickly on the upper face and covered with minute stellate hairs on the lower. Inflorescence in axillary cyme of2 -5 flowers, pale violet Berry globose, red when ripe ; seeds numerous, kidney-shaped, yellow. Flowering period: April -June. DislribUlion : Grows wild, mainly on waste land ParIS used: The whole plant, collected the whole year round. After being well washed, the roots are sliced and dried in the sun or in ovens. The stems and branches are cut into ftagments 2cm. long, then dried in the sun or in dryers. They are roasted before use. Chemical composition: The whole plant, especially 
the roots contain cholan saponins that on hydrolysis yield diosgenin, solasodinone, solasodine and f1avonoids. TherapeUlic uses: The entire plant, and especially the roots, possesses anti-inflammatory, antiallergic and antisclerotic properties. It is used in treating corym, influenza. allergic diseases, lumbago, benign rheumatoid polyarthritis, osteodynia and snake-bite, The dose of roots is 16 to 20g per day and of stems and leaves 30 to 40g per day, in the form of a decoction or elixir. A liquid extract is used as gargle for gingivitis and parodontosis. 349 
Ł 175 Solanum verbascirolium L. Solanaceae Local names : Ngoi, ca Mi, ca long, Ia ri'mg, phO Mc ('Thy), co sa lang (Thai). Description: Small plant, 1 -
3m. high. Stems and twigs covered with a dense yellowish tomentum. 
Leaves alternate, entire, velvety-pubescent on both sides. Inflorescence in axillary or terminal cyme; flowers white. Berry globose, many-seeded, yellow when ripe. Flowering period: March -June. Distribution: Grows wild ; common in the mountains and midlands . ParIs used: Leaves, collected the whole year round and used fresh. Chemical composition: The leaves contain an essential oil, saponins and alkaloids: solanine, solasodine. Therapeutic uses: A locally applied poultice of pounded and heated fresh leaves is indicated for the relief of haemorrhoids and scrofula It is better to apply poultices during the night A plaster made of concentrated fresh leaf juice cures dermatomycosis and impetigo. An internally applied decoction of the leaves is used as a taeniafuge in buffaloes and oxen. 351 
176 Sophora japonica L. Leguminosae Local names: Hoo, hoo boa, hoo m!, Iai lu1lng (Tay). English names: Japanese pagoda tree, Chinese scholar tree. Description: Medium·sized evergreen tree, 5· 7m. or more high. Stems and branches glabrous. Leaves odd'pinnate, alternate; leaflets 13-17, slightly pubescent beneath. inflorescence in terminal raceme ; flowers greenish-yellow. Pod glabrous, distinctly constricted between the seeds, sh3Iply pointed. Seeds yellowish-brown. Flowering period: May -August DistribUlwn : Cultivated in many places. Parts used: Flower-buds and fruit The flower-buds are picked from May to August The fruit is picked from September to November. Chemical compositwn : The buds and fruit contain rutin 8-30% (in buds), sophoraflavonoloside, sophoricoside, sophorabioside, D-maackiain glucoside, and DL-maackiain. The leaves conlain the aIkaIoid cytisine. The seeds yield fatty oil, linolenic acid, proteins and mucilage. TherapeUlic uses: The buds reduce blood pressure and increase capillary resislance. They are a reputed remedy for the prevention of cerebral haemorrhage and are also useful for the treatment of hypertension, epistaxis, haemoptysis, metrorrhagia and haemorrhagic haemorrhoids. They are prescribed in the form of a powder, decoction or infusion; the average dose is 8 to 16g daily. 353 
177 Stemona tuberosa Lour. Stemonaceae Local names: Bach bQ, day ba muui, sam sip bin sam sip (!Mi), pe cMu (H'mong), miri sAy doi (Dao), her linh (K'bo). Description: Perennial climbing shrub, reaching a length of 5·6m., with tuberous roots, fascicled. Leaves opposite or alternate, oblong heart·shaped; main nerves curved, secondary nerves very close. Flowers in the axil of leaves, greenish-yellow extemaIly, reddish-purple within, fetid. Capsule ovoid-<Jblong, many-seeded. Flowering period: March -May. DistribUlion : Grows wild in the hills and mountains. Parts used: Tuberous roots cropped all the year round, especially in autumn. After being well washed and docked at each end, the roots are steam-cooked, then dried in the sun or in ovens at 50-6r.PC. Chemical composition : The tuberous roots contain alkaloids : stemonine, tuberostemonine, isotuberostcmonine. stcmonidine. sinostemonine ; glucides 2.3%, lipids 0.83%, proteins 9%, organic acids (citric, formic, malic, succinic ... ) TherapeUlic uses: The tuberous roots are well known for their antibacterial, antiparasitic and expectorant propenies. They are prescribed in the therapy of cough, ascariasis and oxyuriasis in a dose of 4 to 12g per day, in the form of a decoction, extract, powder or pills, for 4 10 6 days. The decoction or extract is applied externally against impetigo and scabies. Can also be used as an insecticide against mosquito larvae, fleas and bugs. 355 
178 Stephania sp. Menispermaceae Local names: Binh vOi, cu m¢t, day m6i tron,.c11 tOm (fay), co dy kMu (Thai), to-lung doi (Dao). English name: Moonseed. Description : Scandent shrub, 206m. long. Tuber stout, attaining 50kg. in weighl Leaves alternate, long-petioled, suborbicular, herbaceous-membranous, rounded at the base. Inflorescence in axillary compound umbel of orange flowers, the male and female on different plants. Drupe globose, compressed, red when ripe ; seeds hippocrepiform with transverse ribs. Flowering period: Fcbruary -June. DistribUlion : Grows wild among limestone rocks. Parts used: The tuberous roots, dug up aU the year round. The black periderm is removed and the tubers are sliced, then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The tubers concain alkaloids (trace to 2.5%): L-lctrahydropalmatine, stepharine, roemerine, cycleanine. TherapeUlic uses : The tubers have a marked sedative effect. They are successfully used in the treatment of insomnia, stomach-ache, headache, asthma and fever. They are administered in the form of a decoction or tincture, the usual dose being 3 to 6g of dried material. The chief alkaloid L-tetrahydropalmatine is prescribed for neurasthenia and psychoses. It is available in 0.05g cablets and is givcn in doses ofO.05g to 0.15gperday. 357 
179 Streptoc8ulonjuventas (Lour.) Merr. Asclepiadaceae Local names : fill thli II trfu,g, day sil'a 1Xl, sUng 1Xl, khau dn cll (Thy), chila ma sln ('!Mi), u pc; (Dao). Description: Branching perennial twiner, with long, fleshy roots. Stems twining, brown. Leaves opposite, obovate, rounded or cordate at the base. Inflorescence in axillaIy cyme ; flowers small, brownish-yellow. Double follicle, divergent Seeds with a tuft of hairs at one end. All parts of the plant have a milky latex and a silky tomentum. Flowering period: July -December. Distribution: Grows wild in the mountains and midlands. Parts used: TIle tuberous roots, harvested the whole year round but preferably in autumn, are well washed, cut into pieces, boiled with a decoction of Vigna cylindrica, then sliced and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition : TIle roots contain starch and alkaloids. Therapeutic usu : TIle roots are reconstituent and effective for anaemia, renaJ and hepatic hypofunction, dyspepsia, insomnia, neurasthenia, hypogalactia, chronic malaria, rheumatism, ostealgia, menstrual disorders, leucorrhoea, bloody stools, prurigo and snake-bite. Long-term administration has a rejuvenating effect and white hair grows black again. TIle usual dose is 12 to 20g per day in the form of a decoction, extractor elixir. For snake-bite, the root juice is swallowed and the residue used as a poultice. 359 
180 Strobilanthes cusia (Nees) Imlay Acanthaceae Local names : ChAm mOO, chAm nhu1)m, chAm IA to, thanh c1lji, m<lY 6t (Thy), co SO'III ('TMi), tAn gAm (Dao). English name : Assam indigo. Description : Shrubby herbaceous plant, 5O-7Ocm. high. Stems glabrous, swollen at the nodes. Leaves opposite, oblong-{)val, with margins serrate. Inflorescence in axillary inlenupted spike ; flowers violet-blue or pink, corolla slightly curved. Capsule glabrous, narrow and long. Flowering period: December -February. Distribution : Grows wild and is cultivated in damp valleys in the highlands. ParIs used: The leaves are collected in autumn, before the plant flowers and dried in the shade. Chemical composition: The leaves contain the glucoside indican, which yields glucose and indoxyl on hydrolysis. Indoxyl yields indigotin upon oxidatiolL Therapeutic uses : The leaves possess 
antibacterial, antifebrile, antioestrogenic, antiprogestogenic and uterostimulant properties. They are used in treating menorrhagia, metrorrhagia, sore throat, gingivitis and fever, in a daily dose of 4 to 6g in the form of a decoction. In high doses, they are abortifacient in the early stage of gestation. A plaster of condensed extract helps' to cure eczema and impetigo. 361 
181 Strophanthus divaricatus (Lour.) Hook. et Arn. Apocynaceae Local names: sUng &, sUng bO, day vOi voi, co6c be (Tay). Description: Shrub with milky juice. Stems and twigs spreading, 34m. long, marked with lenticels. Leaves opposite, oblong ; apex pointed, short-petioled. Innorescence in terminal cyme ; nowers yellow ; petals prolonged into long Jl3JTOw filaments veined with reddish-brown. Fruit of 2 follicles. Seeds numerous, brown, crowned with a tuft of long hairs at one end. Flowering period: June -July. Distribution: Grows wild on the lower hills and in coastal shrubland. ParIs used: Seeds of ripe fruit, collected in November and December. The tuft of hairs at the end is removed and the seeds are dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The seeds yield the glucoside, divaricoside, which yields sarmentogenin and L-oleandrose on hydrolysis, as well as divostroside, eaudoside and sinoside. Therapeutic uses: D-Strophantin is the purified glucosidal mixture extracted from the seeds. The drug enjoys a good reputation in the trcaUDent of acute and chronic heart failure. It is also destined for patients who arc intolerant of digitalis preparations. The drug is available in 0.25 mg/2 ml ampoules for intravenous injection and is given in doses ranging from 0.25mg to O.5Omg per day. It is preferable to dilute the preparation in glucose solution and to make the injection slowly. 363 
182 Strychnos nux-vomica L. Loganiaceae Local names: Ma ben, cu chi, mac s6 (TIly), CO ben kho (Thai). English names: Nux-vomica tree, strychnine tree, vomiting nut, poison nut tree. Description : Evergreen tree, 10m. high. Young· twigs spinous. Leaves opposite, ovoid, 5-nerved, shining darlc:-green on the upper face. Inflorescence in terminal corymb ; flowers small, tubular, yellowish. Fruit globose, 3-5cm. in diameter, orange-red when ripe. Seeds discoid, compressed, concave on one side and convex on the other, clothed with grey siUcy hairs. Flowering period: March -April. DistribUlion : Wild species, indigenous in the southern part of the country. Parts used: Seeds of ripe fruit, picked in autumn. The seeds are separated from the fruit and soaked in rice swill for 24 hours. The outside siUcy hairs and sprouts are removed. The seeds are sliced, impregnated with sesame oil, then lightly roasted until they turn yellow. Chemical composition : The seeds conlain alkaloids : strychnine. brucine, vomlcme, pseudo-strychnine, N-methyl sec-pseudobrucine, strucine and the glucoside loganin. Therapeutic uses: The seeds have a beneficial effect in the relief of rheumatism, pain in the extremities, neuralgia, paralysis, myasthenia, enteric hypotonia, enuresis and anaemia. The usual dose for adults is 0.05g of processed seeds 1 to 3 times daily, in the form of a decoction or powder. Injections of purified strychnine and massage with a tincture of the seeds are likewise prescribed. Care must be taken because of the very high toxicity of the preparations. 365 
183 Strychnos wallicbiana Steud. ex DC. Loganiaceae Local names : Hoang nan. mlI tien IA qua. vo dolin. Description : Woody climber with hooked tendrils, circinate, thickened upwards. Leaves opposite, strongly 3-nerved. Inflorescence in terminal eorymbiferous panicle ; flowers pale-yellow. Berry globose, 4-7cm. in diameter; seeds diseoid, very eompressed, covered on both sides with yellow silJcy hairs. Flowering period: June -August Distribution: Grows wild in mountainous regions. Pans used: Stem-bark and branch-bark, eollected all the year round and dried before use. Chemical composition : The stem-bark contains alkaloids 5.23%, strychnine 2.37-2.43%, brucine 2.8%. Therapeutic uses: The stem-bark and branch-bark are effect've in treating rheumatism, ostealgia, paralytic cramp of the extremities, lumbago, sciatica, eolic and diarrhoea. They arc also used as an aphrodisiac. The maximum one-time dosc is O.lOg and for 24 hours 0.40g, in powder form. External application is indicated for treating scabies, leprosy and certain persistent dermatoses. Caution must be exercised because of the preparation's high toxicity. 367 
I r 184 Tacca cbantrieri Andre Taccaceae Local names : RAu hUm, dm c1ja la, pM Ina (TAy), pinh do (K'dong), cu dOm (Ba Na). English name : Devil flower. Description : Perennial herb. Root-stock many-noded, horizonlally creeping. Leaves radical, loog-petioled, 
entire; margins wavy. Flowers dark-violet in umbel on an erect or curved scape ; involucre of 4 bracts, 2 small and 2 larger ; bracteoles filiform, coocolorous. Capsule long. Seeds 3-angled, violet-purple. Flowering perwd: July -August. Distributwn : Grows wild in damp forests. ParIs used: The rhizomes, dug up all the year round, are well washed and dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The rhizomes contain cholan saponins that yield diosgenin on hydrolysis, taccaoside and II-sitosterol. Therapeutic uses: An alcoholic maceration of the rhizome is used externally as a liniment in rheumatism. Oral administration is prohibited. The rhizome is also used as raw material for the extraction of diosgenin. 369 
185 Tacca plantaginea (Hance) Drenth Taccaceae Local names : HOi c1ftu, cO vui c1ftu, mfut tao Jay (Tay), 1xr pia m&t (TIuIi). Description : Stemless herb, 20-3Ocm. high. Root-stock round, curved upwards. Leaves radical, entire, attenuate at the base : apex pointed; margins wavy. Inflorescence in umbel of 6-10 flowers on a curved scape, bracts dark-violet; flowers violet. Fruit capsular. Flowering period: Seplember -December. DistribUJion : Grows wild in wet places in mountainous regions. ParIs used: The tuberous roots, collected in summer, are well washed, sliced, impregnated with ginger juice, then lightly roasted on a low fire to obtain a good flavour. Chemical Composilion : The tuberous roots contain cholan saponins that yield diosgenin on hydrolysis. Therapeutic uses: The roots are utilized for the relief of dyspepsia, colic, diarrhoea, jaundice following viral hepatitis, menstrual disorders, hypcr!Cnsion, neurasthenia, sciatica, rheumatism and infantile poliomyelitis. The usual daily dose is 2 to 4g in the form of pills or powder, and up ID 20g in the form of a decoction. 371 
186 Talinum patens (L.) WiUd. Portulacaceae Local names: ThO cao Iy sam, thO nMn sam, dOng dU'OTlg sam, mk sam <liim (TAy), cira Iy sinh (Thai). Description: Succulent perennial herb, 3()'5Ocm. high. Stems greenish, occasionally pwplish. Leaves ovoid, thick, entire; the lower alternate, the upper nearly opposite; nerves inconspicuous. Inflorescence in terminal compound raceme; flowers small, pink. Capsule brownish'pwple ; seeds compressed, shining black. Flowering period: June -August. Distribution: Grows wild in the mountains; is also cultivated for ornamental and medicinal purposes. Parts used: The roots, collected in autumn, are well washed, sliced, impregnated with ginger juice and sugar solution, then steam<ooked before use. Therapeutic uses : The roots possess tonic properties and are used in treating neurasthenia, cough, gastralgia and pulmonary tuberculosis. The barked roots are used in a dose of 20 to 30g, grilled or in the form of a decoction. Theyare also used to treat dehydrating diarrhoea. A bouillon made from the fresh leaves is used as a stomachic. 373 
187 Terminalia nigrovenulosa Pierre ex Laness. Local names: Chieu lieu, chieu lieu gan den. Combretaceae Description: Big tree, reaching 1()'30m. in height Young twigs downy. Leaves opposite, coriaceous wilh small white spots above and a pair of glands at Ihe tOP of Ihe petiole. Inflorescence in terminal compound panicle; flowers white, without petals. Fruit samaroid, largely 3·winged, purple, one-seeded. Flowering period: March-April. DistribUlion : Grows wild in deciduous forests. Endemic in the soulhem part of Ihe country. Parts used: Stem-bark (collected all the year round, but preferably in spring and summer) and fruit (picked in autumn). The periderm is removed and the bark is sliced, then dried in the sun or in ovens. After all the seeds have been taken out. the fruit is dried and lightly roasted before use. Chemical composilion : The stem-bark contains tannin. The fruit yields 20-40% tannin consisting of eUagic, gallic and luteolic acids and fatly oil 36.7%. TherapeUlic uses: The trunk-bark is used as an antidiarrhoeic. The fruit and bark are used in treating chronic dysentery, sore Ihroat, laryngitis and haemorrhoids, in a daily dose of 10 to 20g of dried trunk-bark, or 3 to 6g of dried fruit. in the form of a decoction, pills or a tincture wilh 20% plant material. 375 
188 Thevetia peruviana (pers.) K. Schum. Apocynaceae Local names: ThOng Ihien, ciiy clAu tay. English names: Yellow oleander, bastard oleander, lucky nut-tree, exile tree, exile oil plant Description: Small evergreen plant, 2-3m. in height wilh milky juice. Stems scaled wilh scars of fallen leaves. Leaves a1ternate,linear-oblong, entire, only main nerve conspicuous. Inflorescence in axillary cyme of2-3 flowers, bright yellow. Drupe l!I1gular, smoolh ; seeds brown. Flowering period: April-June. DistribUlion : Cultivated for its elegant foliage and handsome !lowers. Parts used: Seeds of ripe fruit After picldng, Ihe fruit is dried in Ihe sun or in ovens. The dried fruit is broken up to obtain the seeds. Chemical composition : The seeds contain cardiotonic glucosides : Ihevetin (A, B), 2' -O-acetyl cerberoside, neriifolin, cerberin, peruvoside, Iheveneriin, and peruvosidic acid. TherapeUlic uses: The purified glucoside Ihevetin. extracted from Ihe seeds, is prescribed as a cardiotonic drug in a 0.1 % solution for oral use in a dose of 1 to 2 ml daily, or in 2 ml ampouleS for parenteral use, each ampoule containing 1 mg; 1 to 2 ampoules are given per day. The crushed seeds can be used as an insecticide. Caution is needed because of Iheir high toxicity . 377 
I I 189 Thunbergia grandiflora (Roxb. ex Rottle) Roxb. Acanthaceae Local names: Day oon.&xanh, oong bao, madia (H'mang). Description : Climbing plant Stems twining, pubesccnl. Leaves opposite, long-petioled ; base cordate, irregularly lobed. Infloresccncc in terminal drooping leafy raceme, rarely. axillary ; flowers largc, bright blue or violet-blue. Capsule glabrous, apiculate. Flowering period: March -September. DiscribUlion : Grows wild in sunny places, but is also cultivated as an ornamental plant Parts used: The leaves, harvested throughout the year, arc uscd fresh or dricd. Chemical composition: The leaves arc rich in polassium salts. The flowers. contain amino acids: aspartic acid, serine, glycine. alanine, valine ; navonoi1s : apigenin 7-glucuronide, lutcolin, anthocyanin, malvidin ; saccharose, glucose and fructose. TherapeUlic uses: The leaves are commonly used against snake-bite. The petioles arc rcmoved and the juice of 30 to 50g of poundcd fresh I
cavcs is used to massage the site of the snakc-bite, from the top downwards; the residue is applied topically. The leavcs are used on their own or in combination with Abelmoschus moschatus leaves and Clausena lans;"m seeds. Poulticing with a moistened fine powder of dried leaves is also prescribed. 379 
190 Tieghemopanax rruticosus Vig. Araliaceae Local names: £linh lang. cay goi ca. nam dllO"Ilg Jam. Description: Small plant, 0.5 -15m. high with handsome foliage. Leaves alternate. tripinnate. the lower part surrounding the stem ; margins toothed. Inflorescence in terminal raceme of umbels ; flowers small. greyish·white. Fruit globose. flat. All parts of the plant. especially the leaves. are sweetly scented. Flowering period: April. July. DistribUlion : Cultivated as an ornamental plant Parts used: The roots (taken in autumn from plants over 3 years old). and the leaves (collected all the year round). The washed roots are dried in the sun or in ovens. The leaves are used fresh. Chemical composition : TIle roots contain triterpenoid saponins. Therapeutic uses: The roots are well known for their reconstituent properties and are used for I1e3ting general debility. fatigue. dyspepsia. fever. headache. mastitis. hypogalactia. cough. haemoptysis. oliguria, rheumatism and lumbago. They improve the resistance of the body to various noxious agents. The daily dose is from 110 6g of roots or 30 10 50g of stems and branches in the form of a decoction or elixir. A gruel made with 50 to 100g of fresh leaves is galactagogic. A poultice of pounded fresh leaves is effective for wounds. furunculosis. phlegmon and mastitis. 381 
191 Tinospora capillipes Gagoep. Menispermaceae Local names: ell gi6, kim qua llim, kim ngu-u san I1r cO. Description : Slender evergreen perennial climber. Young shoots slightly pubescent. Roots tuberous, long, thickened here and there, brownish-yellow outside, whitish inside. Leaves a1ternate,long-petioled ; base sagiuate; apex pointed; nerves palmate and downy. inOorescence in axillary raceme; Oowers yellowish-green. Drupe oblong. Seeds round, compressed. Flowering period: March -May. Distribution: Occurs in wet and shady places. Parts used: The roots, collected all the year round but preferably in autumn and winter, are well washed, slieed and then dried in the sun or in ovens. Chemical composition: The roots contain columbin. Therapeutic uses: The roots have a beneficial effect for the relief of sore throat, laryngitis, hoarseness, colic and diarrhoea. The daily dose is 6 to 12g in the form of a decoction, an alcoholic maceration or a powder. A poultice of pounded roots is effective in Ireating abscess and phlegmon. 383 
192 Typhonium trilobatum Schott Araceae Local names: Cli ch6c, Mn Dam, nam tinh, phijc hoo (Tay), co tM Ilia (1Mi), nang pIa Mu (Dao). Description: Annual herb, 20 -3Ocm. high. Rootstock thick and round. Leaves trifoliate, base sagittate ; petiole long with lax sheath. Inflorescence in spadix enclosed by a spathe, greenish overlaid with purple, bearing male flowers above, female below, foul-smelling. Berries numerous, red when ripe. The species Typhonium divaricaJum Decne is also used medicinaUy. Flowering period: May -July. DistribUlwn : Grows wild in wet soils. Parts used: The rhizomes, dug up in summer, are weU washed, then dried in the sun or in ovens. Before use, they are soaked in a solution of alum and a maceration of ginger, then sliced, impregnated with a decoction of liquorice and lightly roasted on a low fIre. Chemical composition: The rootstocks contain proteins and inorganic substances Ca, P, I. F, Fe, Na. K ; thiamine. niacin, carotene. folic acid. sterols and . TherapeUlic uses : The rhizome is used with effect for treating vomiting, cough, asthma, excessive expectoration, pyogenic sore throat, headache, gaStric ulcer, abscess and snake-bite. The usual dose is 6to 12g of processed rhizome in decoction form. A poultice of crushed fresh rhizome is active on abscesses and snake-bite. Must be used very cautiously in treating pregnant women. 385 
, I 193 Vitex trifoUa L. f. Verbcnaceae Local names : kinh, <1<;n ba lA, quan fun, t1r bi mac nim (fay). English name : Indian wild pepper. Description: Small tree. Bark smooth, pale grey. Young twigs quadrangular, pUbescent Leaves opposite, trifoliate, with a dense tomentum beneath and a strong smell when crushed. Innorescence in terminal cyme ; nowers pale violet. Drupe globose, embraced by the persistent calyx. Flowering period: April-July. DistribUlion : Grows well on the sea-coast ParIs used: The fruit, picked from September to November, is dried in the sun or in ovens, then lightly roasted before use. Chemical composition: TIle fruit contains the alkaloid viaicine. The leaves yield an essential oil consisting of L-a-pinene, camphene, terpinyl acetate, diterpene alcohol ; navonoids : aucubin, agnusid, casticin, orientin, isoorientin, luteoUn 7-glucoside. TherapeUlic uses: TIle fruit is used in treating coryza, fever, headache, photopsia, vertigo, ophthalmalgia, glaucoma, rheumatism and neuralgia. TIle daily dose is 6 to 12 g per day in the form of a decoction or 2 to 3 g 
in powdered form. 387 
, 194 Wedelia calendulacea Less. Compositae Local names : Sai c1At, hUng tram, cuc nhap, ngO nui, ngO c1At, III d\a cuc. Description: Prostrate perennial herb with erect stems, 20 -40cm. high. Leaves opposite, subsessile, coarsely toothed, with coarse hairs on both sides. Innorescence in axillary and terminal solitary head on long stalk ; flowers yellow, the outer linear and the inner tubular. The fruit is an achene. All pans of the herb have an almond -oil odour when crushed. Flowering period: March -May. DistribuJwn : Grows wild in wet places and is cultivated. Parts used: The whole plant, except for the roots, harvested all the year round, can be used fresh or dried. Che"ucal compositwn: The whole plant contains tannin, saponins, carotene, isoflavonoids and wedelolactone. TherapeuJic uses: TIle whole plant, except for the roots, is well known for its antibacterial, demulcent and antifebrile properties. It is indicated in the treatment of phlegmon, boils, impetigo, mastitis, abscesses, cystitis, cold and eruptive fever, in a daily dose of 50 to lOOg of fresh leaves in the form of an expressed juice or 20 to 40g of dried plant in the form of a decoction or extract A decoction of the fresh plant is used for bathing babies to prevent lichen tropicus. 389 
195 Wikstroemia indica (L.) c. A. Mey. Thymelaeaceae Local names : gi6, gi6 niet, gi6 dnh, nam cam English name: Small·leaf salago. Description: Bushy shrub. Stems and branches at first downy, then glabrous, bearing scars of fallen leaves. Leaves subsessile, alternate or opposite, coriaceous, glabrous, dark green above, pale beneath. Innorescence in tenninal fascicle ; nowers greenish·yellow. Drupe ovoid, scarlet when ripe. Flowering period: June· July. Distribution: Grows wild in mountainous regions. Parts used: The leaves, harvested all the year round, are used fresh. Therapeutic uses: The leaves are particularly suitable for external use in poulticcs against furunculosis and phlegmon. They are crushed and mixed with peanut oil to alleviate their irritant action. They can be also used as an insecticide in agriculture. 391 
196 Xantbium strumarium L. Compositae Local names : Ke dAu ngga, tillnmg nhr, pMt ma, mac nhang (Thy). English names: Ditch-bur, louse-bur, broad cocklebur. Description: Annual herbaceous plant, 40 -70 cm. high. Stems seriate, greenish, occasionally with violet-brown spots. Leaves alternate, irregularly lobed and toothed, clothed with rough hairs. Inflorescence in axillary flower-head; the male and female on the same plant Achene ovate, covered wilh strong hooked bristles. Flowering period: May -August. Distribution : Grows wild on waste land, along roadsides and in dry rice-fields. ParIs used: The fruit, which can be picked all the year round when it is just ripe but still has a green skin, is dried before use. Chemical composition: The fruit contains aIka1oids, sesquilCrpenoid lactones (xanthinin, xanlhumin, xanthatin) and a fatty oil. The leaves and fruit yield iodine (200 micrograms per g of leaves, 220 -230 micrograms per g of fruit). Therapeutic uses : The fruit possesses antiallergic and anti-inflammatory properties. It has a beneficial effect in furunculosis, impetigo, ulcer, urticaria, scrofula, goitre, rheumatism, arthralgia, cramp of the extremities, headache, chronic catarrhal rhinitis, sore throat and dysentery. The usual dose is 6 to 12g per day in the form of a decoction, extract or pills. A decoction of the fruit is also used as a gargle for toolhache and as unguent for tinea capitis and dermatomycosis. 393 
197 Zanthoxylum nitidum (Roxb.) DC. Rutaceac Local names: Xuyen lieu, cay sling. hl!t sen, hoong hrc, san lieu, lUOng tram, mac khen (Tay), cM xa (H'mong). Description: Climbing shrub, prickly. Branches spreading, with pale brown baric: and scattered lenticels. Leaves alternate, imparipinnate; leaflets 5, entire, prickly on main nerve and petiole. Inflorescence in axillary raceme; flowers small, white, unisexual. Fruitof 1-5 caspels. Seeds shining black. Flowering period: February -May. Dislribwion : Found wild in mountainous regions. Parts used: Roots and ripe fruiL BOIh are dried before use. Chemical COmposilion : The stem-bark and root-baric: contain the unstable alkaloid nitidioe, which changes readily into dihydsonitidine and oxynilidine. The root-baric: yields the flavone glycoside diosmin. The seeds contain an essential oil consisting of linalool. TherapeUlic uses: The fruit is used for treating dyspepsia, cough, colic, vomiting, diarrhoea, toothache, paresis, rheumatism and ascariasis. The daily dose is 3 to 5g in the form of a decoction or powder. The roots are used for treating fever, paresis and rheumatism in a dose of 6 to l2g per day in the form of a decoction or alcoholic maceration. The fruit is also used as a spice. Topical appl icalion of an alcoholic maceralion of the f rui t is effective against toothache. A powder made from the fruit is used to treat snake-bite. 395 
r I I I r 198 Zea mays L. Gramineae Local names: NgO, Mp, rna khftu II (1Mi), h<'r bo (Ba Na). English names : Maize, Indian com. Description : Robust annual herbaceous plant, I-2m. tall. Leaves strap-shaped, distichous ; margins ciliate, wavy. Flowers unisexual, both sexes on the same plant; the male in a tenninal spike, the female closely crowded in the axil of the leaves, enclosed in numerous large foliaceous bracts ; style silky, elongate. The fruit is a caryopsis. Flowering period: April-June. Distribulion : Cultivated everywhere. Parts used: Styles with stigmas, collected from the ripe corncob. They are lightly dried in the sun or in ovens at a low temperature. Chemical composition: The styles contain potassium salts. The grains contain starch, glucose, fructose, sucrose, raffinose, fatty compounds, vitamins E, C, K, Therapeulic uses : Maize silk (styles with stigmas), is used as a diuretic in the treaanent of heart disease, hypertension, cystitis, urethritis, urinary lithiasis, cholecystitis, hepatitis, rheumatism and diabetes mellitus. It is also used in combination with vitamin K as a hacmostatic. The usual dosage is 20 to 30g per day in the fonn of a decoction, infusion or liquid extract 397 
199 Zingiber officinale Rose. Zingiberaceae Local names : GUng, sinh khUO'llg, can khUO'llg, co khinh (I'hai), sung (Dao). English name: Ginger. Description : Perennial herbaceous plant Root·stock horizontal, tuberous, aromatic, pale yellowish. Aerial parts growing annually in wet season, 0.5 -
1m. high. Leaves alternate, snap-shaped, subsessiJe, distichous. Inflorescence in radical spike; flowers yellow, spo!ted with violet-blue (rarely produced). Fruit : capsule. Flowering period: May -August DistribUJion : Cultivated for its root-stock as spice and as medicinal plant ParIS used: Rhizomes, dug up in winter. After uprooting, they are put in a vessel and covered with dry sand for preservation. They are used fresh or dried. Chemical composition : The rhizome contains essential oil consisting of D-<:amphene, zingiberene, sesquiterpene alcohol, citraJ, borneol, geraniol; resin, gingerene, shogaol, gingerol. TherapeUJic uses : The rhizome is characterized by antibacterial and stomachic properties. It is active on colic, flatulence, dyspepsia, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, haemorrhagic dysentery, headache, coryza, influenza, coldness of the extremities, weak pulse, laryngitis, hoarseness, dyspnoeic cough, rheumatism, allergic prurigo and metrorrhagia. It is prescribed in a dose of 3 to 6g daily in decoction, powder, pills or elixir. 399 
I I 200 Zizyphus mauri!iana Lam. Local names: Tao, tao chua, tao (Tay). English name: Indian jujube. Rhamnaceae Description: Medium-sized tree, 5 -
10m. high, with dense spreading crown. Young shoots pubescent. Branches glabrous, blackish-brown, armed with spines. Leaves alternate, ovate or nearly round, prominently -3-nerved, minutely serrulate, densely tomentose beneath. Flowers greenish-yellow, in axillary cyme. Drupe globose or ovoid, pulpy, pale yellow when ripe. Flowering period: June -October. Distribution: Cultivated for its edible fruit. Parts used: The leaves and seed kernels. The leaves are used fresh or dried. The kernels, removed from the ripe fruit, are used as they are o
r roasted. Chemical composition : The fruit contains vitamin C, betulinic acid and betulin. The kernels yield saponins, phytosterols_ The leaves contain rutin and querCetin. Therapeutic uses: The seed kernel is sedative and is used to treat palpitations, insomnia, amnesia, general debility and hyperhidrosis. It is also used as sialagogue in cases of reduced salivation. The daily dose is 1 to 2g of raw kernel, or 6 to 12g of thoroughly roasted kernel, in the form of a powder, pills or decoction. The roasted leaves are effective against cough and asthma, in a dose of20 to 40g per day in decoction form. A poultice of pounded fresh leaves is active against boils and impetigo. 401 
